Notes
 
This is a management and leadership book. However, we have
kept the writing style simple, so that those without a
management or leadership background can also learn from the
book.
 
This book is a continuation of ideas given in the first book,
Corporate Chanakya. If you have already read it, you will
understand these concepts much better. If not, we suggest you
read the first book also to get a better understanding of
Chanakya’s teachings that can be applied in different situations
one comes across.
 
The original sutras of Chanakya have been used in this book.
They are English translations given in Kautilya’s Arthashastra by
RP Kangle from the University of Mumbai, Sanskrit Department
and published by Motilal Banarasidas. Those interested in
studying the original Arthashastra fully are advised to read it.
Various translations of the Arthashastra by other scholars are
also available in the market.
 
This is a book with practical application. Therefore, pages have
been given for you to make your personal notes. Do apply the
learning in your workplaces and personal lives. We will be happy
to 
know 
your 
success 
story. 
Do 
write 
to 
us 
at
info@ciplmumbai.in
 
If you have loved the concepts of Chanakya, make sure you
teach the same to others. Begin as a student of Chanakya, but
aim to be a teacher of Chanakya’s wisdom.
 

Spreading knowledge only increases your own knowledge. Trust
me, it has worked for me and it will work for you as well….
 

Acknowledgements
 
USUALLY, AFTER WRITING a first book that goes on to become a
bestseller, many think it is easy to write the second book. It is far
from the truth in my case.
 
This book took more time and energy than the first book. More than
200 meetings were held over two years between myself,
Sivanandhan sir and the Jaico team. A lot of time was spent in
research to understand the working of the police system; studying
various books, websites and magazines; collecting data; meeting
and interviewing various people who worked with Sivanandhan sir.
 
With my busy travel schedule and research and teaching
commitments at the University, it was impossible to do everything
myself. I asked the Jaico team to give me editorial support in this
project, which was becoming bigger by the day. By the time we
completed the project, we had so much data and information that
the challenge was what ‘not’ to publish, rather than what to.
 
I would first like to thank Sivanandhan sir for agreeing to be a part
of this book project. He has had several offers, both during his
tenure and after his retirement from the police force, to write a book
on his experiences. I guess we were lucky to have him agree to this
project.
 
The information that he provided was very valuable. All the facts and
figures included in the book give insights into the unique police
leadership style of Sivanandhan sir. Sivanandhan sir and I spent time
in our homes, restaurants, offices, hotels, in flights, airports and
even in the university to check and recheck each detail we had
gathered during the research for this book. This was a massive
exercise by itself.

 
Jaico Publishing House – Akash Shah, Ashwin Shah and Mr
Sharma are my guides in the publishing world. They spotted me as a
talent and made a bestselling author out of me. The editorial team
including Sandhya, Lakshmi, Poornima and Pragya, who supported
me at every stage, were more like a family that helped this book
reach the final destination of publication. They have been very
patient and committed throughout. Nita, who designed the
wonderful cover page for the book deserves special appreciation.
The cover is different, yet a continuation of my first book, Corporate
Chanakya.
 
The marketing and sales team including Vijay, Steven and all the
branch managers and salespersons at Jaico’s ten offices across India
gave inputs for the betterment of this book.
 
Chanakya Institute of Public leadership (CIPL) – the team at
the University of Mumbai, Department of Philosophy, was always
there to encourage me on this project.
 
Ranjit Shetty, Director at CIPL took my workload while I was
focusing on writing this book. My students and now office staff,
Malathi Thevar and Viraj Padhariya were my research assistants. I
could ask for any reference from the Arthashastra and I would get
the information in less than a minute. This showed their deep study
of the book.
 
The other professors at the department were always supportive. A
special thanks to Dr Meenal Katarnikar, our faculty member at the
Kautilya Arthashastra research project, where we run a six-months
public leadership course.
 
I would also like to thank all my students of the Arthashastra, who
have committed their lives to practicing Chanakya’s teachings. They
have decided to change the course of our nation. Most of them have
joined public life, the political field and other socially relevant
careers.

 
Thank you to my teacher and guides during the study and research
and PhD work of the Arthashastra – Dr Gangadharan Nair, from
Chinmaya International foundation and Dr Shubhada Joshi, Head of
the Department of Philosophy, University of Mumbai, because of
whom I have been able to take the wisdom of Chanakya into the
academic field.
 
Our Vice-Chancellor, Dr Rajan Welukar who released my first book,
Corporate Chanakya on 15 August, 2010, and without his continuous
support, this second book would not have been possible.
 
My special thanks to KJ Somaiya Bharatiya Sanskriti Peetham, from
where I did my MA in Sanskrit (through Kavikulaguru Kalidas
Sanskrit University). My special thanks to Shri Samir Somaiya, Dr
Kala Acharya, Dr Lalita Namjoshi and the entire team at Somaiya for
guiding me.
 
Thanks to Dr Chandraprakash Dwivedi, who made Chanakya the TV
serial, which has inspired many people like me to understand the
contribution of Chanakya to India.
 
Chinmaya Mission – I am a product of Chinmaya Mission. This
spiritual organization has given me everything. Without my study of
the Arthashastra at Chinmaya Mission, neither my first book nor this
book would have been possible. Special thanks to Swami
Tejomayanandaji, the current global head who encouraged me to
study ancient scriptures in the traditional Gurukul and Guru-Shishya
Parampara. I would also like to thank Swami Advayanandaji – the
head of Chinmaya International Foundation; Swami Sacchidanandaji,
who taught me what management is, as a school going child and
the hundreds of spiritual teachers of the Chinmaya Mission across
the globe, who have been supporting my mission of spreading the
knowledge available in the Arthashastra.
 
My family has always supported me by managing my erratic work
and travel schedules. Surekha – I know you are the best mother a

child can get. Thanks for taking care of my children – Aanvikshiki
and Arjun – in their most formative years. While I teach leadership
and management across the globe, you are teaching them spiritual
values, which is the first step towards leadership. A special thanks to
my parents CKK Pillai and Sushila K Pillai; parents-in-law – Shekhar
and Dhanavati Shetty and sisters-in-law, Sarikha and Chandrika.
 
MTHR Global – Thank you to my friends from the organiza-tion,
More than Human Resource (www.mthrglobal.com) – from where
the name, Corporate Chanakya emerged. Rajesh Kamath, Vipul
Agarwal, Ashish Gakrey, Rajesh Gupta, Preeti Malhotra and Keyur
Jani have been giving a new look to Indian management in the HR
industry.
 
SPM group of companies – Without the support of Muulraj
Chheda, Pravin Chheda, Rajen Chheda, Niket and their spouses, I
would not have been able to devote all my time to spreading
Chanakya’s teachings. I am what I am because of the support of the
SPM family in the initial days of spreading Chanakya’s teachings. I
continue to be on the board of the SPM Foundation, which is doing
lot of noble work in society.
 
Thank you to Venkat Iyer, my childhood friend and partner in my
spiritual tourism business. Your friendship is more valuable to me
than all the riches in the world. Let God give everyone a friend like
you, who stands like a solid rock in good and bad times. Pankaj
Joshi, Milind Agarwal and Rajesh Ajgaonkar have given me new
dimensions of thinking to take Chanakya’s teachings forward.
 
Friends in the police force — Sandeep Karnik, IPS and Satish
Menon (Railway Protection Force) were my school friends who joined
the police force. It was nice to see friends as cops for the first time
in my life. They have always given valuable insights on the workings
of a policeman. Both stand today as role models in the police force.
 
Shemaroo Entertainment — That is another family of mine.

Madhuri and Hiren Gada, Atul Maru and the whole team have been
instrumental in taking Chanakya’s teachings to the world through
various projects like the management film, Chanakya Speaks, audio
book and training kit.
 
Friends in the corporate world – A big thank you to Dr Ajit
Ranade and Ashish Dwivedi from the Aditya Birla group; Tarang Jain,
MD of Varroc group; Sushil Wadhwa, Chairman of Claris
Pharmaceuticals; Shashi Kiran Shetty, CMD of Allcargo; Asit Koticha
and Sameer Koticha of ASK group; MP Ramachandran, CMD of
Jyothy Laboratories and Satish Shenoy from L&T. All of them have
taken special efforts to promote Chanakya’s teachings within their
organizations and in various business circles.
 
Educational and academic institutions – My sincere thanks to
the principals, teachers, professors and directors of various colleges
and management schools who were instrumental in inviting me to
speak as a guest lecturer. They also suggested my book as reference
material on Indian management and encouraged students to do
research projects on Chanakya.
 
The best was the introduction of Chanakya’s thoughts in the
institutions of the armed forces like the Defence Services Staff
College (DSSC), National Defence College (NDC) and Institute of
Defence and Strategy Analysis (IDSA). Vice Admiral Gaikwad, Wing
Commander Aditya Kiran, Col Nair, Col Pradeep Gautam and the
respective 
Commanding 
Officers 
of 
these 
institutions 
were
instrumental in making Chanakya’s warfare strategy a matter of
serious study in military science.
 
Author friends — A big thank you to Amish Tripathi, Ashwin
Sanghi, Rashmi Bansal, Devdutt Pattanaik, Anita and Harsha Bhogle,
Rushabh Turakhia, Santosh Nair, Mukta Mahajani… all of them
bestselling authors themselves regularly gave me valuable tips to
make the second book better than the first.
 

Thank you to bookstores including Crossword, Landmark, Sapna,
Reliance, Media Mart and various others across India and their
teams who recommended the book to their customers; and to
various online bookstores which promoted Chanakya and the e-book
versions online.
 
Politicians — My gratitude to Shri Rajesh Tope, Education minister
of Maharashtra; Shri Sanjay Dina Patil, Member of Parliament; Shri
Prithviraj Chauhan, Chief Minister of Maharashtra and Shri Narendra
Modi, Chief Minister of Gujarat who have encouraged other
politicians and government officials to study Corporate Chanakya
and apply the teachings in their respective workplaces.
 
And finally, thank you to the millions of Chanakya fans like you, who
not just read my book but also gifted it to others. Chanakya and
management would not have been famous and relevant in our
generation without your support.
 
Dr Radhakrishnan Pillai,
Mumbai
 

Contents
 
Notes
Acknowledgements
Preface
Introduction
Who Was Chanakya?
1 Swami
2 Amatya
3 Janpada
4 Durg
5 Kosha
6 Dand
7 Mitra
About the Authors

Preface
 
SOME PEOPLE GET lucky. And some get very lucky.
 
But people like me call it the Grace of God or Guru Kripa.
 
My first book, Corporate Chanakya published by Jaico turned out to
be a bestseller. It broke many records in sales in the field of
management books. It was in the bestseller list ever since its
release. It got translated into ten regional languages – Hindi,
Marathi, Gujarati, Assamese, Oriya, Bengali, Tamil, Malayalam,
Telugu and Kannada.
 
It was brought out as an audio book, again turning out to be a
bestseller in the audio book category. The book inspired the world’s
first management film based on Chanakya’s teachings, Chanakya
Speaks (www.chanakyaspeaks.in). Within a month of its release, the
film received the Award of Merit at the Indie Fest (Calfornia).
 
Owing to the success of the book, I was invited to speak and lecture
in over hundred institutes, colleges and universities across ten
countries in less than two years. It also helped me set up our
institute, 
Chanakya 
Institute 
of 
Public 
Leadership
(www.ciplmumbai.in) in the Department of Philosophy at the
University of Mumbai. It is the first institute of its kind in the world,
which teaches the Arthashastra.
 
The journey has just begun and there is a lot to be done in years to
come. I feel the hand of God behind all this success.
 
Success brings problems with it. Can I repeat this success? The first
book set a benchmark, and ever since its release people have been
asking me, “When is your next book coming?”

 
For me the question was different..…
 
Instead of ‘when’ my next book would come the question was,
‘what’ will my next book be about.
 
I struggled with this question for many days and months, which
rolled into years. I knew clearly that the subject would be Chanakya,
yet I did not want to write Corporate Chanakya – part 2. The first
book was complete in itself, yet continuity was needed for my old
readers.
 
Chanakya was a man of action. What he said was not just theory,
but what could be practiced and applied. What worked in the past
can work in the present too. I wanted to bring back Chanakya in our
generation.
 
How I would deal with such a great legend in my next book was a
question that I was deliberating on for a long time. I knew all the
theories of leadership given in the Arthashastra. Yet, there are
chances of them just being theories, without any practical value to
you and me.
 
I got my answer the day I met D Sivanandhan.…
 
He was the Director-General of Maharashtra Police at that time, a
few months away from retirement from the topmost police rank. I
had heard about him and the work he had done. We were sharing a
dais for a leadership program for ophthalmology doctors. That day, I
spoke on the theory of leadership and Sivanandhan sir spoke on the
‘practical’ aspects of leadership. He spoke about situational
leadership, transformational leadership and what goes into the
making of a leader!
 
As I was listening, a quiet bell rang in my mind. “Here stands a man
of action. He has delivered against all odds. I talk about it, whereas
he has done it!”

 
For me, Sivanandhan sir became a person who was a real-life leader,
who had practiced all that Chanakya had said.
 
The next week I met Sivanandhan sir in his office with my students
from Mumbai University. We were supposed to be with him for half
an hour but in spite of his busy schedule, he gave us two-and-a-half
hours. The students could ask him any questions and he gave them
quick and detailed answers. I came to know that before joining the
police force, he was also a professor of economics. The teacher in
me – met the teacher in him.
 
From there, a relationship developed, where we kept meeting each
other again and again. I knew he was someone whom the police
force, the government and our nation was proud of.
 
He was a man of achievement, yet there were many aspects about
him that very few people knew. He was always in the limelight, yet
very few had seen the complete picture of his life. Many more
meetings followed and I came to know him well. There were
wonderful incidents and stories that he narrated, which many did not
know about.
 
And then, a meeting between Sivanandhan sir and my publishers,
Jaico finally brought clarity to the book you are holding.
 
The theme of this book is surely on Chanakya; yet it is different from
the first. I have written on leadership, but taking Sivanandhan sir as
a case study, as an example of great and transformational
leadership.
 
In this book, you will find a leadership model of Chanakya. You will
also find that leadership model being brought alive by Sivanandhan
and what he did during his days in the police force as a leader. He
set high standards for others, becoming a role model.
 

This book is about theory meeting practice, leadership concepts
meeting application, age old formulae meeting modern-day success
stories.
 
Chanakya’s leadership ideas, comes alive with Sivanandhan sir.
 

Introduction
 
 
Chanakya's 7 Secrets of Strategic Leadership
 
Leadership – the Concept
 
IN THE ARTHASHASTRA, Chanakya refers to the leader as Vijigishu,
meaning one who wants to be victorious and conquer in spite of the
challenges. Even today, a leader has to think like a conqueror and
succeed, irrespective of the circumstances.
 
Leadership as a concept has been evolving over the centuries.
“Leader” initially referred to the king of a country or nation. Today,
we have leaders in every field — politics, business, science,
academics, administration, armed forces, society, community, various
unions, sports teams and even spirituality. Some leaders may have a
large following; others may not. Some leaders are great orators and
public speakers, while others sit quietly at their desks or laboratories
and become “thought leaders”. They give a new direction and
perspective to the way people think.
 
Some leaders are immensely popular when they are alive; their work
attains speed and recognition in that generation. Other leaders are
celebrated after they are dead, because they were much ahead of
their times and their generation could not understand their

greatness. Some leaders, such as Lokmanya Tilak, Rabindranath
Tagore or Thiruvalluvar are known in their particular regions, in a
village, a community or a nation. Others like Mahatma Gandhi,
Napoleon, Albert Einstein or Abraham Lincoln gain worldwide
recognition.
 
Yet, all these leaders have something in common, some factors that
earned them respect and appreciation, which we also call attributes
of leadership.
 
So what exactly is leadership?
 
Across the globe, leadership has become a subject of serious
discussion, study and research. Universities now have centers of
leadership. The number of books written on leadership has been
growing rapidly.
 
In India, leadership has been taken very seriously. Today, all eyes
are on India, as it is among the fastest growing economies of the
world. India is new, yet old. A young nation which got independence
in 1947 has a history, culture and tradition of over 10,000 years. As
in any other nation, India and Indians draw inspiration from the
heroes and leaders of the past. As a country of over a billion people,
we are proud of the achievements of our past leaders. Our leaders
such as Gandhi and Emperor Ashoka inspired and created more
leaders across the globe. Others like Shivaji, Subhash Chandra Bose,
Sardar Patel, Jawaharlal Nehru, Rajendra Prasad, Lal Bahadur Shastri
and other freedom fighters inspire our present generation and inject
patriotism in the youth.
 
When we go back further in time, we find leadership lessons from
superheroes like Krishna, Rama and Buddha in epics like the
Ramayana and Mahabharata. For Indians, these lessons are part of
their thinking, a part of daily living and discussions.
 

However, a unique factor about India is that we also learn from the
person who created the leader, the “leadership guru”. The leader is
important, but the creator of the leader is more important, because
a leadership guru can create more leaders. Swami Ramdas guided
Shivaji to become a successful king. Ramakrishna inspired
Vivekananda to become a giant spiritual leader.
 
Some people like to study leaders; people like us love to study
leadership gurus. And among the leadership gurus, one person
stands out as the epitome of leadership teachings – Chanakya.
 
Chanakya was the guru of Chandragupta Maurya, the first king of
the Maurya dynasty and the grandfather of Emperor Ashoka who
spread the golden teachings of Buddhism across the globe.
Chanakya has been credited by many historical scholars as the first
person in world history to create the concept of a nation or rashtra.
Aspects of his teachings have been documented in his work The
Kautilya Arthashastra, written in the 4th century BC
 
Over the last several years, I have been a student and teacher of the
Arthashastra. Having learnt the Arthashastra under Dr Gangadharan
Nair at the Chinmaya International Foundation (www.chinfo.org), I
have discovered many ancient Indian models of leadership. I am
amazed how Chanakya’s leadership models are relevant even today.
They are not just ancient; they are eternal.
 
One of the leadership models given in the Arthashastra is
“Chanakya’s Saptangah” — the seven pillars of a kingdom. These
pillars of old, forgotten over the years, can be interpreted as the
“seven secrets of leadership” in the modern-day context. A training
module on this was developed and we have been conducting
leadership development programs across the globe.
 
We have trained leaders in corporations and business groups, in the
armed forces and the police, as well as scientists, academicians,

social organizations, spiritual institutions, government departments
and many others.
 
It was inspiring to see that this leadership model was relevant to all
the sectors of society, in India and abroad.
 
Chanakya's Seven Pillars of Leadership
 
Chanakya describes this leadership model in Book 6, Chapter 1,
Verse 1 of the Arthashastra.
 
"Swami, Amatya, Janpada, Durg, Kosha, Dand,
Mitra iti Prakritya” (6.1.1)
 
(The king, the minister, the country, the fortified city, the treasury,
the army and the ally are the constituent elements of the state.)
 
Any kingdom can be classified into seven parts, which put together
make the kingdom complete.
 

 
A happy kingdom consists of an ideal king (swami) as a leader,
guided by able ministers (amatya), who takes care of the citizens
(janpada), providing them good infrastructure and facilities (durg),
making sure the treasury (kosha) of the state and the people is
always full, which is protected by an able army (dand) and helped by
good allies (mitra).
 
This model gives us a big picture of leadership. Leaders need to look
at the forest, whereas most of us usually look at only the trees.
 
In a company, a person working in the IT department will focus on
issues connected to his area of work. The accounts department only
looks at financial numbers. The marketing and sales team will focus
only on customers and clients. The production department is
concerned about the number of units manufactured. This is looking
at the company in parts.
 

A chairman or CEO will need to understand all these departments
separately and in a unified manner. The chairman knows that the
work of each department is separate and unique, but that they are
interdependent. To look at the big and the small simultaneously is a
leader’s skill.
 
Can the finance person understand marketing and production? Can
the marketing person understand what the human resource (HR)
department does? Can the HR department go beyond recruitment
and administrative work? This is looking at the big picture. This is a
leadership approach.
 
There is often a misconception that if a person in the production
department starts to learn about the functioning of other
departments, he may become less productive in his own work.
However, the reverse is true. The production person will improve his
skill set and become a more productive employee. An HR person
who understands the functions and roles of other departments
becomes a better HR person.
 
Then why do most of us look at only the parts and not the whole?
This is due to our past training and background. Our families,
education and environment are responsible for the way we think. So,
if you are a chartered accountant, you have been trained in dealing
with financial numbers and reports. An HR person is educated and
trained to handle IR (industrial relations), salaries, interviews,
manpower planning and issues connected with his particular area of
work. Over a period of time, you become a specialist in your area.
Today, it is called an era of “super specialization”.
 
There is nothing wrong in being a specialist. But in the process, we
miss the big picture. We forget to look at the company and only look
at the department. The point is – do not limit yourself to a particular
department; consider the big picture. Think like a chairman or CEO;
this is the leadership way of looking at the company.
 

Today, courses such as “Finance for Non-Finance Managers” are
becoming quite popular. Such courses teach you to look at the same
company from a different perspective. They train you to think
holistically and not piecemeal. This is leadership training. Good
companies train their employees across departments and functions.
In turn, they make the employees great leaders.
 
Chanakya’s Seven Pillars of Leadership model also trains one to look
at both the forest and the trees. The trees without the forest and the
forest without the trees are both incomplete. But knowing that both
are interdependent makes us more aware of our environment and
the conditions in which we operate.
 
This book explains the Seven Pillars of Leadership model and uses it
to teach you about leadership. We call it the seven secrets of
leadership. In this book, we have shown you how the model is being
applied in the Indian policing system. However, the model is not just
about police leadership; the principles of this model can be applied
to leadership in any arena.
 
In this book, you will see both the theory and practice of leadership,
Chanakya in thought and action. You will see ancient India and
present India together. This book has an interdisciplinary approach.
We have connected Chanakya’s leadership theories and application
in D. Sivanandhan’s police leadership. More important, the book will
help you to discover the leader in you.
 
You may be a businessman, policeman, dean of an educational
institution, a homemaker or a student entering the job market. Each
person can learn about leadership. A person who is not a leader can
become a leader by applying these seven secrets. An existing leader
can become a better leader by following these principles. If you are
a parent, you can teach these principles to your children and make
them leaders of the future. Each chapter in the book provides tips to
apply these principles in your personal and professional life.
 

Read on to understand leadership. Read on to become a leader.
 
Leadership in the Police Force
 
The leader has to be clear about his goals, objectives and
responsibilities, because he has to give direction to his team. The
highest form of leadership is transformational leadership, where one
transforms the organizational culture to a positive, productive and
result-oriented culture. For instance, the Green Revolution or the
telecom revolution transformed India. Every person in the nation
reaped the benefits of these revolutions. Transformational leadership
has similar results.
 
It is often questioned whether one person alone can transform the
whole system. In reality, only one person can transform and create
change. Of course, team effort makes the change possible. Yet, the
whole process of change begins with that one person who created
the change — the transformational leader.
 
Different types of leaders require different skill sets, because the
objective of each leader is different. In political leadership, the vision
of the person with a missionary zeal is important. Chief ministers like
Narendra Modi and Nitish Kumar are political leaders who have made
the states of Gujarat and Bihar among the most developing states of
India. The government of any state has the required resources, both
human and physical, as well as an administrative system at its
command. Once the political will for change gets fired up, the
system gears for positive action and changes take place almost
immediately.
 
In corporate leadership, once resources like money are available
through various funding agencies or IPOs, the organization can get
into action and create products or services. It can employ the best
brains, set timelines and launch products. Steve Jobs, as a corporate
leader, successfully launched the iPhone, iPod and iPad within a

short period of time. Ratan Tata launched the Nano at the price he
wanted to offer to customers.
 
Is leadership in policing any different? For that, one needs to
understand that the objective of police in India is maintenance of
law and order and crime prevention and control.
 
However, within the ambit of these broad objectives lie various
unknowns. Anything and everything out of the ordinary seems to
require policing — riot control, traffic control, maintenance of
communal harmony, protection of a VIP and a common man,
investigation of crime, handling Naxalism, tackling terrorism — the
list is endless. We cannot define the role of the police as easily as we
can define a company’s role, where the results can be easily
measured by sales targets.
 
Moreover, one mistake in the police is a matter of life and death.
New types of crime emerge every so often. For example, cyber crime
was unheard of 20 years ago, but is a big part of police
investigations today.
 
Policing is a very dynamic activity. It is round-the-clock work.
Therefore, police leadership requires many more skills than other
types of leadership. On the one hand, the police works on
eliminating the underworld don; on the other hand, it also helps a
lost child reach home. It is about making women feel secure and
senior citizens feel safe at home. It is about stopping a crazy youth
from speeding on his motorbike; it is also about allowing an adult
boy and girl to exercise their legal right to choose their marriage
partner, despite their parents’ opposition.
 
Yet, our society does not give due respect to the role of the police.
This is not to say that all policemen are perfect. There is corruption
in the system; some policemen are no better than criminals in
uniform. However, not all policemen are corrupt or criminals. Policing
is an essential part of society, and without it, a society will collapse.
 

The challenges faced by the police force are unimaginable. When the
country celebrates festivals like Diwali, Ganesh Chaturthi, Durga
Pooja, Independence Day, Eid or Christmas, the police has no
holidays. The duty of a policeman is 24 hours and he has to report
to work for 12 hours a day. They have no family lives to speak of. A
policeman’s wife lives with the worry of her husband becoming the
target of a criminal’s bullet. It is difficult to find suitable bridegrooms
for policemen’s daughters. What’s more, boys in police uniform are
not considered ideal matches for prospective marriages. There are
no unions to fight for policepersons’ rights; they get much lower
salaries than their counterparts in the corporate world. In fact, most
senior police officers are intelligent and sharp enough to have been
CEOs of multinational companies, had they taken that route. The
media is constantly at their heels for breaking news. Policemen also
go through tremendous stress due to constant political pressures.
 
Consider this. Mumbai has a population of around 2 crore, and the
number of policemen and policewomen is 42,000. Half of them work
in the day and the other half during the night, since they have 12-
hour workdays. Thus, approximately 20,000 policepersons protect 2
crore people, which makes it around 1,000 people to be protected
by each policeperson. That is similar to one salesperson taking care
of 1,000 sales accounts. How would you compare stress in a
corporate job and a police job?
 
Also, a policeman has to deal with anybody and everybody — a film
star, an illegal migrant, a lunatic or a drunkard on the street, a
young student attempting suicide, traffic accidents, passion-driven
crimes, extortion calls. Each policeman constantly deals with the
unknown.
 
The police force is constantly faced with lack of resources and
manpower. Yet, their target is to establish peace in society. When
they have achieved the target and there is peace, no one thinks
about them. When the crime rate is high, they are blamed. The

presence of the police is not felt; but their absence is. Because of all
these reasons, policing is often called a thankless job.
 
Yet in the same system and society, what brings hope of a better
future is good leadership in the police force. In this whole mess,
there emerges a leader who inspires everybody from top to bottom,
someone who disciplines them like a father and cares for them like a
mother.
 
This book is about those police officers who have, time and again,
infused hope in lakhs of men and women and pride in the uniform
they wear. The happiness they get when they look back in their
careers and say, “Yes, we took the right decision to join the force,”
comes from the efforts of such leaders. Such leaders instill a sense
of achievement in policemen, making them feel they have
contributed to society and helped in nation building.
 
D Sivanandhan is a case study throughout the book. Yet, this book is
about the police force which stood strong with the leader. It is about
many other leaders before him who displayed leadership in different
forms. This book is written for future police leaders as a document
for reference. And for the young men and women who can believe in
themselves and say, “I too can be like Sivanandhan and turn the
tide.” As they say, leadership is to succeed “in spite of”, not “because
of”.
 
This book is also for a common man like you and me. Next time,
when we see a traffic policeman doing his job in the hot afternoon,
instead of feeling angry and labeling him corrupt and inefficient, we
could empathize with him and say, “Thank you sir, for what you do; I
know my wife and children are safe at home…”
 

Who Was Chanakya?
 
BORN IN THE 4th Century BC, in India, Chanakya was also known as
Vishnugupta and Kautilya. Through centuries, scholars have
described Chanakya as a rare mastermind who became an expert in
varied and specialized fields like management, economics, politics,
law, leadership, governance, warfare, military tactics, strategy,
finance, accounting and several others.
 
He was responsible for bringing down the Nanda dynasty and
establishing his able student, Chandragupta Maurya on the throne as
the Emperor. He is therefore called the “kingmaker”. He is also
credited with masterminding the defeat of Alexander in India, who
was on his march to conquer the world.
 
As a political thinker, Chanakya visualized the concept of a “nation”
for the first time in human history. During his time, India was split
into various kingdoms. He brought them all together under one
central governance, thus creating a nation called Aryavartha, which
later became India.
 
He documented his lifelong work in his books, Kautilya’s
Arthashastra and Chanakya Niti.
 
The Arthashastra has 6000 sutras, classified into 15 books, 150
chapters and 180 topics by Chanakya himself.
 
Many philosophical concepts about leadership in the Arthashastra
like Aanvikshiki (the science of thinking), Rajrishi (philosopher-king),
Indriyajaya (one who has control over himself), Vijigishu (conqueror)
are India’s unique contributions to the world.
 

Scholars and intellectuals across the globe for centuries have been
using the Arthashastra for guidance on subjects like leadership and
governance. For ages, rulers across the world have referred to the
Arthashastra for building a nation on sound economics, based on
spiritual values.
 
Arthashastra when literally translated means “scripture of wealth”
but it contains knowledge about every subject under the sun. It is
the knowledge of wealth and a wealth of knowledge.
 

Chapter 1
 
Swami
THE LEADER
 
Swami the king
Amatya the minister
Janpada the country
Durg the fortified city
Kosha the treasury
Dand the army
Mitra the ally
 

KAUTILYA’S ARTHASHASTRA IS a book of leadership. It is a guide to
and a ready reference for tackling various issues that leaders may
face while leading the country. A study of the Arthashastra was a
must for kings in India for many centuries.
 
The Arthashastra is divided into 15 books. In Book 6, Chanakya
defines the seven pillars of the state in the first verse of Chapter 1.
He states that the first pillar is the leader himself. An important point
must be made here. Even though the Arthashastra refers to the
leader as “he” (this book will follow the same convention), the
qualities of a leader are not restricted to a particular gender. Today,
there are women leaders and also leaders from transgender
communities. Anyone can become a leader, irrespective of their
gender, birthplace and background. So, while reading this book,
think, “I too can become a leader.”
 

PART A
 
THE FIRST SECRET
 
Swami: The Leader
 
WHO IS A leader? And why does Chanakya place so much emphasis
on a leader? Most of us think of a leader as a person with a
particular designation and post — the chairman or CEO of a
company, the captain of a sports team, the dean of an educational
institution or the general of an army. These are leaders no doubt.
However, certain other attributes are required to make one a “great
leader,” a leader who is productive, result-oriented and inspiring.
 
One may get a leadership chair (position) by heredity, power or
influence. But if one is not capable, the chair will not keep you.
 
– Swami Chinmayananda
 
What are these attributes and qualities? We will discuss the qualities
of a good leader in this chapter.
 
Before that, let us ask an important question:
 
   Which would you choose: a good leader or a bad leader?
 
The answer is obvious. Everyone aspires to work for the best
leaders. However, every organization does not necessarily have good

leaders. Therefore, people look for those rare gems who can lead
the team to achieve its goals with honesty and efficiency, without
resorting to manipulative, unethical or illegal means.
 
Now let us change the situation and ask the next question:
 
   Which would you choose: a bad leader or no leader?
 
Is this difficult to answer? In most organizations, this is the reality.
Everyone wants the leader to be ideal, but the leaders are usually
not even close to being perfect. In fact, most of us feel that they are
bad leaders, and if they would quit or were replaced, the
organization would make great strides towards success.
 
Imagine that suddenly, such a leader meets with an accident and
from the next day onwards, the organization does not have a head.
The board continues to look for a replacement. However, an ideal
leader is not found for the next one year. As a result, the
organization’s activities slow down because there is nobody to make
strategic decisions and employees are not accountable to anyone. It
becomes the story of anybody, then somebody and finally nobody
doing the work. Gradually, employees begin thinking that the old
leader was not all that bad — at least things were moving, even if
slowly. It was better than the organization being directionless and
employees feeling like orphans.
 
This leads us to another important question:
 
   What if the bad leader becomes a good leader?
 
This is possible. And the question we will ask is: how? There are
various methods by which a bad leader can become a good leader.
Also, many employees can be trained to become leaders. So, if the
top leader dies or retires, there is a pool of leaders to choose from,
for the top position. This can be achieved by training and developing

leadership qualities among all the people in the organization, right
from the top to the bottom.
 
In the army, there is a saying, “A soldier never quits till he is dead.”
It means if the leader of a group dies during a war, the next one
takes up the leadership role and continues the war. If the second
person dies, the third person takes over as the leader. There is an
inbuilt system in the armed forces that creates leaders in every
situation.
 
One may wonder whether anyone can become a leader. The point
here is that in the group that goes to fight the war, everyone is not a
General. But even those in the lower ranks have been trained to
think like leaders. Leadership is not just by rank or designation; it is
by attitude and competence.
 
In the Mumbai terror attack of November 26, 2008, Tukaram Omble,
an assistant police sub-inspector, took a leadership position. He
marched ahead, taking bullets on his chest, but caught Ajmal Kasab
alive. Omble proved his leadership, irrespective of his designation.
 
During the same terror attack, the Mumbai police lost 16 men. Of
these, only two — Hemant Karkare, Joint Commissioner of Police,
Anti Terrorist Squad and Ashok Kamte, Additional Commissioner of
Police, Eastern region — were IPS officers. The IPS or Indian Police
Service is the highest level of police leadership in India. Both Karkare
and Kamte were leaders in the true sense, who had the best training
and top positions. The other 14 were police inspectors, sub-
inspectors and constables.
 
Yet all of them proved to be leaders. Today, the country salutes all
the 16 men as leaders for their sacrifice, irrespective of their
designations. That is “situational leadership” in action. The training
and attitude of these men made them come forward and become
leaders in a crisis.
 

We should also note that there were many others who did not die in
the operations, but proved their leadership qualities when they took
charge and controlled the situation.
 
Therefore we see that a leader, a Swami, according to Chanakya, is
a person who takes the initiative and is ready to sacrifice for the
higher purpose.
 
A well-known incident in the life of Dr Abdul Kalam shows how his
mentor and leader handled a crisis. Prof Satish Dhawan was then
Chairman, Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) and Dr Kalam
was assigned the job to develop the first satellite launch vehicle SLV-
3, to put the satellite, Rohini in orbit. This was one of the largest
high-technology space programs undertaken in 1973. The entire
space technology community, men and women, were geared for this
task. The hard work of thousands of scientists, engineers and
technicians resulted in the first SLV-3 launch on August 10, 1979.
 
SLV-3 took off in the early hours and the first stage worked
beautifully. Even though all the stage rockets and systems worked,
the mission could not achieve its objectives, as the control system
malfunctioned in the second stage. Instead of being placed in orbit,
the satellite sank in the Bay of Bengal. The mission was a failure.
 
At a press conference at Sriharikota after the event, where both Prof
Dhawan and Dr Kalam were present, Prof Dhawan announced that
he took responsibility for not achieving the mission, even though Dr
Kalam was the project director and mission director.
 
Later, when SLV-3 was re-launched on July 18, 1980, successfully
putting Rohini into orbit, at the subsequent press conference, Prof
Dhawan put Dr Kalam in front to share the success story with the
press.
 
Thus, the leader gives the credit for success to those who worked
for it, but absorbs the responsibility for their failure. This incident

had a tremendous impact on Dr Kalam’s life, and later, he became
one of the most respected leaders of India.
 
In Book 1, Chapter 19, Verses 1–5 of the Arthashastra, Chanakya
says:
 
“If the king is energetic, his subjects will be equally energetic. If he
is slack (and lazy in performing his duties) the subjects will also be
lazy, and thereby, eat into his wealth. Besides, a lazy king will easily
fall into the hands of the enemies. Therefore, the king should
himself always be energetic.”
 
Leaders set an example and become role models. Even in the
Bhagawad Gita, Krishna says, “As the leader, so the people.”
 
Therefore, being energetic is very important. A leader must be
physically energetic and mentally alert and vigilant.
 
If the leader is lazy, so will be the followers. The most productive
people will become lazy under bad leadership. On the other hand, an
energetic and active leader will inspire even lazy people to perform
beyond their own expectations.
 
Chanakya also points out that if the leader is not vigilant and alert,
the people will eat into his wealth. So, alertness has a direct impact
on the finances of an organization. People who are corrupt are in
constant fear of getting caught by the leader. If the leader is not
alert, he will invite corruption into the system.
 
It is most important for the leader to be energetic. This means that
a leader cannot expect others to motivate him. He should be self-
motivated. The difference between motivation and inspiration is that
motivation is always “because of,” while inspiration is “in spite of.”
Inspiration for a higher cause, a higher ideal for which he is ready to
sacrifice everything is what motivates a leader.
 

In the police force, the inspiration is the nation. It is an ideal so
high, that each policeman is ready to give the ultimate sacrifice of
life for it. However, the leader must be the role model here as well.
As the saying goes, “When the going gets tough, the tough get
going.” That is initiative. That is leadership. That is inspiration.
 

PART B
 
ACCORDING TO CHANAKYA
 
Leadership Qualities
 
IN BOOK 6 of the Arthashastra, Chanakya describes various qualities
of a leader. In this book, we will focus on the key aspects of
leadership qualities for a swami. These qualities are not a birthright;
they must be developed by hard work and consistent efforts.
 
These qualities are universal principles of leadership. So, if you want
to become a leader, practice these qualities. Or, you may observe an
ideal leader, they possess these qualities.
 
The qualities of a Swami (Leader) are (Book 6, Chapter 1, Verse 3 of
the Arthashastra):
 
     Intelligent and dynamic
     Associates with elders
     Truthful in speech
     Does not break promises
     Grateful
     Desirous of training
     Easily approachable
Let us look at each of these in detail.
 
   Intelligent and dynamic
 

Intelligence and dynamism are two sides of the same coin. Every
leader has to be intelligent. Intelligence is often thought to be about
academic brilliance or high IQ scores. Research has proved that
every person has equal intelligence at birth. However, as time goes
by, depending on a person’s education and environment, his or her
intelligence is sharpened.
 
One can become more intelligent by making an effort to stretch your
mind and intellect. For instance, we see students who put extra
efforts and score good marks in exams. Yet, education must remain
a continuous and lifelong process. Reading good books, newspapers
and research journals will help in making you more aware and
informed about the world. But also note that gathering information
does not make you intelligent. You need to develop the skill of
analyzing the information you have gathered, taking important
decisions and acting on those decisions.
 
If a leader has understood the key problem through his study,
research, discussion and analysis, and reached a solution for the
problem, that is only the starting point.
 
The next step is to implement his findings. That is the real challenge
where leaders play the key role.
 
Therefore, the second aspect is being dynamic. It requires initiative,
guts and self-confidence to implement your plan. “Plan out your
work, and work out your plan,” says Swami Chinmayananda. A
leader has to do that to prove his leadership abilities.
 
Implementing a plan is not easy, because there will be many hurdles
along the way. Some people never start, thinking of the obstacles
they will face. Others start, but stop when they face obstacles. Great
leaders start and make sure they succeed, in spite of the problems.
 
Leaders know what results are and achieve them.
 

   Associates with elders
 
The Sanskrit word for this is Vriddhasanyoga, that is, being in
association with elders.
 
This means learning from “real-life” experts in fields such as
leadership, management and finance. Your journey to meet and
learn from real-life experts should go on forever.
 
There are three types of people: those who learn from their
mistakes; those who never learn from their mistakes; while the best
are those who learn from others’ mistakes. “Association with elders”
means learning from those who are more mature and experienced
than you are.
 
To keep learning is a great quality of a leader.
 
   Truthful in speech
 
Speaking the truth is important for a leader. But one step before that
is to “understand the truth”. This is the key to success. A leader has
to find out the truth before taking any decision.
 
For example, if there is a conflict in an organization, a leader cannot
take a hasty decision. He has to talk to people and gather
information and evidence. After that, he has to verify and cross-
verify the information. If he has found out the truth, the next step is
to make sure he accepts the truth and takes a call based on the
findings.
 
Finally, when the leader speaks with regard to the action and
decision taken, this is the time to be “truthful in speech”. The leader
should say what he feels is right and correct. A great leader is one
who calls a spade a spade.
 

A leader needs to face reality and the truth is sometimes bitter. But
to stand by the side of truth is leadership. Another great challenge in
facing the truth is emotions. A leader needs to remember that “one
needs to understand emotions but not get emotional.”
 
In human beings, nature has placed the head above the heart. A
leader should let the head rule the heart, and not the other way
around.
 
The “gut” feel most of us talk about in leadership is a mix of head
and heart. It is the highest level of leadership when one operates
from being intuitive. Many people call intuition the sixth sense.
Intuition comes from insights. Insights come from experience and
maturity. And maturity comes from understanding the truth.
 
All great leaders had the quality to understand, face and speak the
truth. Most people believe that truth and integrity are good theories,
but cannot be practiced in the world today. However, the fact is that
only men of truth and integrity prove to be real leaders in the long
run. In the end, truth alone triumphs; “Satyameva Jayate” says our
national symbol (derived from the Mundaka Upanishad).
 
A leader is truth itself.
 
   Does not break promises
 
Lord Rama in the Indian tradition is regarded as the ideal king.
Gandhiji, the father of our nation, promoted the concept of “Ram-
Rajya”, the ideal kingdom of good governance.
 
In the Tulsi Ramayana, there is a famous couplet which talks about
the tradition of leadership in Rama’s dynasty: “Raghukul reet sada
chali aayi, pran jaaye par vachan na jaayi.” (The tradition of the
Raghu dynasty is that even if we need to sacrifice our lives, we will
not break our promises.)
 

Leadership is not about over-promising and under-delivering. It is
about delivering what is promised.
 
“Walk the talk” is the mantra. It is a very simple, yet profound
formula. There are times when even the team does not trust the
leader to honor the commitments he makes. That is where
leadership emerges. As Narayana Murthy, said in the film,
 
Chanakya Speaks, “Leadership is making people walk on water… It is
making them ready for sacrifice….”
 
At times, you have to walk alone. Nobel prize winner Rabindranath
Tagore wrote in Geetanjali, “When the world stops… the leader
starts walking…walk alone…”
 
Remember, it was not the promise that you made to others that you
have to keep, but the oath you took when you started on the
journey.
 
In the police force, every recruit takes the “constitutional pledge” to
enforce the law of the land when he dons the uniform. So finally, it
is about not breaking the promise made to oneself.
 
That is a leadership promise.
 
   Grateful
 
Gratefulness means humility. True strength lies in humility. There is a
belief that humble people are powerless. But the opposite is true —
powerful people are humble.
 
Let us see humility in action here. Sivanandhan, in his long and
illustrious career in the police force, has worked with various seniors,
colleagues, subordinates and team members, and dealt with lakhs of
people in his various postings. It is not possible for him to remember

the names of so many people, but most people would remember
him, given that he worked at senior positions.
 
It happened often that someone he had worked with in the past met
him and asked, “Sivanandhan sir, do you remember me? I am so and
so and I worked with you at the Thane posting.” To avoid the
embarrassing situation of saying “No, who are you?” or “What is
your name?” Sivanandhan began treating everyone with respect and
saying, “Yes sir, how are you?” or “Yes madam, thank you for your
good words,” even though such persons may have been junior in
rank to him. People remembered him for his humility.
 
You can also try the same when you work as a leader. Thinking “I
know all” is a dangerous attitude for a leader.
 
Giving credit to team members is important. If they perform well, do
not take away the limelight. Instead, take a backseat and let the
world know who the true hero is. Appreciating someone will only
add to your value.
 
How do you know if you are truly humble? A rich man once went to
his guru and said, “I want to develop humility.” The guru suggested
that he help someone who is lower than him. He did that and came
back to the guru and said, “I have helped a poor man today with
wealth. Am I humble now?” The guru said, “No,” and asked him to
help another man lower than him. But after repeated visits to
different people, he finally asked his guru, “When will I become
humble?” The wise old man replied, “You will have obtained humility
when you can no longer find anyone that you think is lower than you
in any way!”
 
Everyone may not be equal in power, status or wealth. But the day
you realize that everyone is equal in the eyes of God…
 
…The leader in you is born.
 

   Desirous of training
 
Being desirous of training has two aspects: the desire to get trained
and training others. These are two sides of the same coin. Training is
a very important part of our lives. When we are born into this world,
we are completely dependent on our parents and the environment.
They slowly train us in walking, talking, toilet manners and dealing
with the external world.
 
When we go to school, we are taught to read, write, socialize and
become competent in many other skills. As we grow up, we take
professional courses to build competencies that will make us
employable. Till this stage of life, we are in a high learning mode.
But once we are settled in our lives with a profession or job, we
become complacent.
 
This is dangerous. From here, one has to develop the attitude of
continuous learning. Keep learning and push yourself for more
knowledge in your respective field. It is said that the secret of
success is not just to learn, but to unlearn, relearn and continuously
learn.
 
Leaders know this. They learn from books and also from people;
from reports, newspapers and data provided by government
agencies. It becomes their passion to keep learning. They are never
full; they keep opening themselves to new possibilities.
 
Learning should stop only when you die. Buddha was on his
deathbed and visitors flocked to meet him. A disciple asked, “Why
do you meet so many people in this stage?” He said, “So that I can
learn a little more from each person before I go.”
 
One has to learn regularly and continuously. This is being desirous of
training. But one who is trained should also train others. Never keep
your knowledge to yourself. It has to be shared with others. A true
leader never worries about knowledge being stolen or taken away by
others. In fact, knowledge grows when it is shared. When a candle is

used to light another candle, its flame does not reduce. Every candle
should ignite fire in many other candles. That is the true fulfillment
of life.
 
A leader ensures that training of the highest quality is given to the
team members. Whether people stay with you for the long-term,
short-term or medium-term, investment in training has to be of the
highest standards. Great leaders build good training systems and
institutions. They are involved in the training themselves. They
design the programs and also make sure the best people are invited
to share their knowledge and wisdom.
 
This is fulfillment of leadership.
 
   Easily approachable
 
A leader makes himself available to the people when they require
him, not just when he requires them.
 
The leader plays multiple roles at the same time. He is father and
mother, friend, philosopher and guide. A leader is like a ready and
available resource for any problem within the organization.
 
People do not just look upon the leader. They look upon him with
hope. And having a leader who takes care of his people is a great
blessing.
 
As a leader in the police, Sivanandhan knew the problems of the
system. Obedience is expected at the highest level in the police from
your subordinates. A person should be ready to die if his leader
gives that order. But Sivanandhan knew that he had to take care of
his subordinates as well. To take care of them, he needed to know
their thoughts, sentiments and behavior.
 
Giving unrestricted entrance to people is important. A problem can
be handled well if it is in a nascent stage. If decisions are not taken

then, it becomes uncontrollable. For the information and data to
come to you at the initial stages itself, an open-door policy or being
easily approachable is required.
 
In the olden days too, the kings had a Janta Durbar, a place where
the king used to meet the common man. The word “king” may not
be relevant today, but each one of us is a king in his or her world.
Whichever post you hold at the top, middle or bottom, you are the
king of your world and the people below you look to you for
guidance and decisions.
 
So create your own Janta Durbar and let information flow to you like
iron filings move towards a magnet. Be a problem solver and quick
decision maker.
 
The leader in you is now helping others in the true sense.
 
Practicing the leadership qualities
 
All these qualities are interconnected and signify the various
dimensions of a leader. You may wonder where to start from —
which quality to develop first. In a circle, every point is a starting
point as well as an ending point.
 
Start by practicing any of these qualities. You will be surprised that
the remaining qualities will slowly develop on their own. For
example, if you start reading more, you will become more informed
and intelligent. At the same time, because you become aware of
other possibilities, you will naturally start looking at things differently
and become humble in attitude. Or, if you want to practice being
grateful, start with an open-door policy. Respect every person who
comes to meet you.
 
Leadership is being equal to all. Each of you can also develop this by
treating your servants, drivers or subordinates with respect.
 

Take any of these qualities of leadership and start practicing. The
important part is to start “practicing”. Knowing the qualities and
theories of leadership is not enough. To become a leader, one has to
think like a leader; to think like a leader, one has to act like a leader.
And to act like a leader, it has to come from the heart.
 
Let the leader in each one of you awaken.
 

PART C
 
LEADERSHIP IN ACTION
 
Tackling Organized Crime
 
You cannot choose your battlefield, the Gods do that for you;
But you can plant a standard, where a standard never flew.
 
NATHALIA CRANE
 
IN THE 1990s, the situation in Mumbai was not just bad, but very
bad. Fear psychosis had taken over and gangsters from the
underworld ruled the city.
 
The first duty of any government is to provide security to its people.
Security does not mean having hundred guards protecting you. It is
a feeling of being safe. If that feeling is not ensured and everyone is
worried about their very survival, it is living death. People in Mumbai
had lost the feeling of security.
 
It was October 1997. A gangster, Javed Fawda, was killed in a police
operation. A PIL was filed against the Mumbai police, alleging that it
was an illegal killing. When Judge AS Aguiar was asked to enquire
into the matter, he not only looked into that incident, but also found
95 other questionable matters of police action against gangsters.
This included the killings of Sada Pawle and Vijay Tandel in police
operations.
 

As a result, the police force was demoralized. After that, the police
avoided taking any strong action against organized crime. The same
police operation specialists who had become larger than life at that
time were now on the defensive, because they were accused of false
police operation killings of Pawle, Tandel and various other
gangsters. This gave a boost to the organized crime syndicate and
shooting and violence continued unabated.
 
The underworld took the city to ransom. In 1998 alone, in 93
incidents, 101 people were killed by the underworld. The police
became mere spectators and the law and order situation became a
leadership failure, to the extent that no marriages were taking place,
no cars were purchased, no flats were sold and no high-profile
dinners were organized, because of fear of extortion. If you had a
fancy car, gangsters demanded money; if you arranged a marriage,
they demanded money. In the financial capital of the country, capital
was not flowing in; instead, it was flowing out.
 
Imagine a situation from October 1997 through July 1, 1998, where
the police had not taken any strong action.
 
What was desperately required in this situation was just one thing:
police leadership.
 
In these tense times, Sivanandhan was brought from the jungles of
Gadchiroli on July 1, 1998 to Mumbai as Joint Commissioner of
Police, Crime (Jt. CP, Crime). He was the only addition to the
Mumbai police force of that time.
 
He had six months of that year left to perform. He had the whole-
hearted support of RH Mendonca, then Commissioner of Police,
Mumbai city. In addition, he also had the trust and backing of the
entire force. And in retrospect, he would credit the success of his
achievements to the entire team.
 
This was also the time when India moved from a country with just
one national channel for years to more than a hundred television

channels.
 
The real-time news channels were a blessing and a curse at the
same time for the police, like a two-edged sword. The information
subordinates would give to Sivanandhan previously, would be
flashed all over the country, even before someone in the police
department could know. Thus, the news channels became informers
even to the policemen. If the police force managed the information
well, they could take advantage. If they failed, there would be public
outcry and even the government’s stability could be endangered.
 
One day, Sivanandhan was watching a housewife’s interview on a
television news channel. She said, “I am afraid that my husband,
who goes out in the morning, will not come back in the evening.
Until he reaches, I am not sure if he is alive and will ever come
back.” This statement was like an electric shock for Sivanandhan.
 
As a police officer who had taken the oath to protect citizens, he
thought, “This is not the way citizens should feel. We should be able
to give them protection. If this housewife is not feeling safe, I am
not doing my job.”
 
The leader in him had awakened.
 
It was time for action.
 
But what was the action plan?
 
The first thing to do was to boost the morale of the police force.
 
He called his men and told them, “The pending enquiry commission
court matter is taking its own time. But we will give you all the legal
assistance. So, leave the past behind and let us perform in the
present situation.”
 
The next step was to give the policepersons legal protection. He met
VR Manohar, a famous lawyer, and apprised him of the facts.

Manohar defended the police and eventually got them a very
favorable judgment from the Bombay High Court in February, 1999.
 
However, the challenge was, before the Bombay High Court
judgment came, the police had to be motivated. The time for action
was now; the police could not afford to waste time in waiting for the
court’s judgment. The fear that had paralyzed the police system
was: what if they took action and the High Court punished the police
itself? Sivanandhan had to lead from the front to get the system
moving.
 
He called his team and motivated them by saying, “You take strong
action against organized crime, and I will look after you.” This,
however, did not ensure legal protection. He continued, “My name
can be in the FIR. You can make me an accused in case the High
Court decides to hang people who have taken action.”
 
But motivational lectures and great promises are not enough in
leadership.
 
He had to back up the team with the resources they required. And
among the first resources was money. In a country like ours, at a
time when the basic necessities like food, clothing and shelter are
still problems, how can a person be motivated by just false promises
and hope?
 
Most of the constables live in slums and poor housing conditions,
apart from facing various other problems. How they were looked
after is a matter which will be discussed in the following chapters.
But in this case, the reality was that money did play an important
part in the gang wars and the police was used in these gang wars.
 
The common practice at that time, it was rumored, was that the
police used to take money from the gangs themselves, to eliminate
and neutralize one gang against the other. In a way, the gangs were
funding the operations. This was absolutely illegal, but the police
leaders had no moral control over their own policemen.

 
As a leader, one should understand the value of money and respect
the need for it. Your team members are also human beings and
many have large families to feed, educate and take care of.
Corruption that comes from “greed” is totally unacceptable. But if a
person is corrupt due to basic “need”, it is the responsibility of the
leader to understand this reality.
 
Therefore, taking this into account, Sivanandhan made a proposal to
the government and got  1 crore sanctioned as special funds for the
operations.
 
Once the money was allocated, he called in his team — all the
constables and inspectors in the 12 teams spread over 12 zones. He
then openly distributed it. This was legally acceptable money and
they signed receipts for accepting it. Now, there was transparency in
dealing. By doing this, he empowered his team multifold. They could
buy mobile phones, move all over the country, give informants the
necessary incentives. Overall, such empowerment resulted in
fantastic operations.
 
Sivanandhan was one of the officers instrumental in bringing in the
MCOCA (Maharashtra Control of Organized Crime Act, 1999) to
combat organized crime and terrorism. The preamble to the MCOCA
says, “The existing legal framework, i.e. the penal and procedural
laws and the adjudicatory system, are found to be rather inadequate
to curb or control the menace of organized crime. Government has,
therefore, decided to enact a special law with stringent and
deterrent provisions including in certain circumstances power to
intercept wire, electronic or oral communication to control the
menace of organized crime.”
 
Unlike in other laws, under MCOCA, confessions before senior police
officers are admissible, not only against the accused giving the
confession but also against the other accused in the same case. The
accused can also refused anticipatory bail.
 

The first crime registered under the MCOCA was the attempt to
murder Shri Milind Vaidya, the ex-Mayor of Mumbai city. Three
others were killed in this attempt. The trial was successfully
completed within a year. Three criminals were sentenced to death;
seven others got life imprisonment and a collective fine of 1 crore
and 5 lakh.
 
This quick trial and enhanced punishment sent shivers down the
spine of the organized crime sector.
 
Many subsequent arrests and convictions of high-profile film
producers and highly placed people sent the right signal to the
criminals, warning them to not take the police for granted.
 
The police force had been given money, resources and legal help
and protection from the High Court, from the judgment, from the
press. Training was provided along with strong backing.
 
The next step was to get the right people. Various capable officers
were brought into the team. One such was the Assistant
Commissioner of Police (ACP), Dashrath Avhad.
 
Sivanandhan also encouraged them to become confident and start
taking action.
 
An open challenge was thrown to the team and they took it.
 
He said, “Together, now let us turn the tide.”
 
On November 11, 1998, the tide turned.
 
Crime Branch officers had information that some gangsters would kill
a targeted person in front of the Arthur Road jail.
 
The team waited patiently for the gangsters to arrive. When the
gangsters, a group of five people, came to the spot, they were
surprised to see the police. They started running and were chased

up to Dadar. The police opened fire in self-defense and four criminals
were shot dead. This operation was the path breaker. Otherwise,
until then, it was people who were being killed and the police was on
the defensive.
 
This operation gave the badly required boost to the police morale.
The confidence that the police could do better was regained. And
then onwards, there was no looking back.
 
This was followed by many convictions under MPDAA (Maharashtra
Prevention of Dangerous Activities Act). Almost 1,500 gangsters and
extortionists were detained, 1,500 weapons were recovered and
about 300 gangsters were neutralized in police operations. All
through this, Sivanandhan had to be continuously alert and show
real leadership. Having started it all, they had to win the game.
 
   Resourceful thinking and strategic information gathering
 
Out-of-the-box thinking was required at every moment. An instance
of strategic information gathering should be mentioned here. At that
time, only a few telephones were being tapped for information. But
when Sivanandhan stepped in, he thought of a new way.
 
It struck him that it would be better to strike at the root of the
problem than look at the problem at the superficial level.
 
Instead of tapping the telephones of small, local gangsters, the
police force decided to tap the telephones of gang leaders who were
hiding in Pakistan and other countries.
 
He walked into the Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited (VSNL) office and
talked to the operations manager to get those numbers tapped. So
that when gangsters from all over the country would call Pakistan to
speak to their gang leaders, the police could obtain fantastic
electronic intelligence which gave them the competitive advantage.
 

For example, the police got information about a plan to kill Pahlaj
Nehlani, the film director. The police team waited outside Nehlani’s
house and neutralized the gangsters who were targeting him. Many
other high-profile film personalities like Aamir Khan, JP Datta and
Mahesh Bhatt were also on the hit list. By obtaining the information
on time, the police were able to neutralize the gangsters.
 
This was truly strategic leadership. The idea of tapping the
telephones of the gang leaders hiding in foreign countries, rather
than their foot soldiers in India, was a brilliant breakthrough. As a
result of this, the lives of hundreds of people were saved, including
prominent people from the film industry, political leaders and
industrialists.
 
From that time onwards, no builder has been shot dead. Whereas,
earlier in 1995, builders like Om Prakash Kukreja, Vallabh Thakker,
Natwarlal Shah, Thakiyudeen Wahid, Managing Director of East West
Airlines, Gulshan Kumar, the famous film producer and music
industry tycoon, and Sunit Khatau, the mill owner had become the
unfortunate victims of the underworld. These high-profile people had
been shot in broad daylight, leading to public outcry. The business
community had even declared a “black” Diwali, hoisting black flags
to show their extreme unhappiness. It was not just the problem of a
city any more. The state of Maharashtra and its assembly, and even
Delhi, the national capital, were shaken. This became international
news and a cause of deep concern for the economic and security
foundations of India.
 
Therefore, the success of this operation can be gauged from the fact
that from 2001 through 2011, until the recent shootout of J Dey, the
journalist and Iqbal Kaskar, no shootout had ever taken place.
 
One hundred and one business people were killed by gangsters in
1998. Sivanandhan and the Mumbai Police, as a team, succeeded in
bringing this number down to zero for the next 11 years. He
succeeded in reestablishing the feeling of safety among people. As

peace was restored, the hotel industry flourished, the building
industry flourished and all other industrial activity grew.
 
The commercial capital of India, which had almost come to a
standstill, once again became a booming finance center. That year,
to acknowledge the success of the Crime Branch in eliminating
organized crime in Mumbai, the state of Maharashtra awarded eight
President’s Police Medals for Meritorious Services to the team
members, while Sivanandhan was awarded a President’s Police
Medal for Distinguished Services.
 
Out of the eight police medals that were given in the year 2000,
seven were received by Sivanandhan and his team as Joint CP,
Crime.
 
The seven people who received these medals were:
 
1.   D Sivanandhan, Jt CP (Crime)
2.   AD Shinde, DCP (Economic Offence Wing)
3.   SJ Inamdar, Inspector, Crime Branch
4.   VK Navghare, Inspector, Crime Branch
5.   MD Javed Rahid, Inspector, Crime Branch
6.   AM Darekar, Head Constable, badge no 18591
7.   BA Gadge, Head Constable, badge no 14833
They had outperformed expectations. They had delivered results.
 
Now he could recall the lady on television and proudly say, “Madam,
I hope you are happy and sure that your husband will come back
home alive and not worry about him becoming a target of some
local goonda or gangster.”
 
Let us flash back to what the situation in Mumbai was like before
Sivanandhan took over as Joint CP, Crime and the situation after
that. Mumbai is a city where businesses flourish and people feel
safe.
 
How was this done?

 
There was a six-pronged attack strategy on Mafia gangs:
 
     Detentions
     Extortionists detained
     Gangsters arrested
     Firearms seized
     Police operations
     MCOCA arrests
Let us look at some statistics to get a clear indication of the situation
based on the above strategy.
 
   Extortion cases
 
In the period 1998-2001, for a total of 1,229 extortion cases, there
were 1,651 detentions; which means that this was the period of the
maximum number of detentions. Therefore, the number of extortion
cases reduced from 728 in the year 1993 to 176 in the year 2009
and has been on the wane after that.
 
   Police operations
 
In the period 1998-2001, 298 notorious criminals were neutralized in
238 police operations. The impact of this action was sustained for
years.
 
   Shootout by criminals
 
In inter-rivalry gang wars, 192 criminals were eliminated in 176
incidents. In 2009, there have been only eight shootouts.
 
   Gangsters arrested
 

A total of 1,635 gangsters – a mind-boggling figure – were arrested
in the period 1998-2001, bringing complete control over the
underworld nexus. As a result, in 2009, only 66 criminals were
arrested, while in 2012, only 38 gangsters were arrested. This
clearly shows that the gangs began losing their grip over the city.
 
   MCOCA cases
 
After the MCOCA was implemented, in the period 1999-2001, in 53
cases, 214 gangsters were arrested. In 2009, this figure came down
to 24 gangsters arrested in only five cases.
 
   Incidents of murders with firearms
 
Gangsters used to only murder people in broad daylight. The worst
year was 1998, when in 93 incidents, 101 citizens were killed.
Extortions were a common phenomenon. There were 367 cases of
extortion and petty crimes reported, in which 32 film stars received
extortion threats. To bring those criminals into custody in a single
year, 640 arrests were done.
 
   Multi-pronged attack on Mafia gangs (complete statistics)
 
(Note: the figures in bold are indicative of the period when
Sivanandhan was the Joint CP, Crime)
 

 
Source: Crime Branch, Mumbai Police
 
   Working with ethics and reliability
 
To prove leadership, you must have moral superiority and become a
role model; nobody should be able to accuse you of corruption or
any other deviousness. The only focus of the leader should be the
application of his mind to the job. If this integrity is maintained, the
leader is respected in every transfer he gets, and even after he
retires.
 
Prior to this stint in Mumbai, during 1995-98, Sivanandhan was the
Deputy Inspector General (DIG) of Police in the Nagpur range, which
included Nagpur, Chandrapur, Gadchiroli, Bhandara, Bondia and
Wardha. The challenges he faced in this Naxal stronghold were
completely different from heading the force in Mumbai.
 
In these Naxal-affected areas, his leadership style was completely
different from what he later adopted in Mumbai. What worked in one
place and time will not work in another. The leader has to create
customized solutions for different challenges.
 
In these areas, policepersons were “class enemies”, according to the
Naxalites. Therefore, the police were ambushed and killed and
landmines were used against them.

 
While killing gangsters in police operations could work in metros,
Sivanandhan knew that such killings with Naxalites would backfire,
because it was an ideologically driven insurgency or terrorism, as
one can call it. Killing Naxalites like gangsters would result in the
blooming of so many more thousands of Naxalites.
 
So, he thought of a different solution. He had able assistants along
with other experienced team members. Together, they made a
different action plan.
 
The strategy was to persuade people to surrender. At that time, the
government was not giving them any financial assistance for
surrendering. Only by good practices and good policing were
Sivanandhan and his team able to handle the situation.
 
It was ensured that no unnecessary person was arrested; no
innocent person was harassed and nobody was shot unnecessarily.
Finally, the team was able to persuade all the Maharashtrians in the
Naxal areas to surrender.
 
An example is of Shivaji Tumreddy and his wife. They surrendered
with their AK-47 rifles along with 1.5–2 lakh of cash. They were not
offered any money; they surrendered with money instead.
 
To achieve such results, you should trust others and also be trusted
by others. This is a totally different strategy.
 
Naxalism continues to be a very serious problem in our country. But
at least in Maharashtra, Sivanandhan was able to contribute in a
major way to controlling it. By using strategic leadership and
applying a different thought process, by the time Sivanandhan and
others in their team left the Nagpur range, there was no
Maharashtrian left in Naxal groups. The team was able to achieve at
least that much.
 

An incident is worth mentioning here connected to Naxalism and
moral standards.
 
During that tenure, a group of policepersons had set up camp in a
particular area, where the Naxals were on the prowl. Through their
night vision binoculars, the policepersons saw a group of villagers. In
the green forests, the people were wearing green uniforms and had
guns in their hands.
 
The policepersons thought they were Naxalites and challenged
them. During the operations, one villager was shot. By the time the
police realized he was not a Naxalite, it was too late. The police tried
to evacuate this person, but before he could reach the hospital, he
bled to death.
 
Now, the dilemma was whether the police should say they had killed
a Naxalite or admit the fact that a common villager had been shot by
mistake.
 
This was brought to Sivanandhan’s notice over the phone. His clear
direction was to call a press conference and admit that a poor
villager had been shot due to mistaken identity.
 
Sivanandhan also had to take responsibility for the situation. He told
the entire Nagpur range, consisting of the policepersons of seven
districts, to contribute whatever they could, say a day’s salary, to
ensure the rehabilitation of the poor woman who had lost her
husband. This woman was also given employment later.
 
These are two diametrically opposite examples. The main takeaway
from both these is: leadership only matters. In fact, Sivanandhan’s
leadership in both these examples highlights the qualities of
leadership described by Chanakya. Let’s see how:
 
Intelligent and dynamic
 

When Sivanandhan took over the task of cracking down on the
underworld in Mumbai, he had to do it intelligently, in a carefully
planned manner, strategically using the legal means available to him.
But good plans alone do not get results. You have to put your plan
into action. We see Sivanandhan making an action plan and acting
on the plan, which included imparting confidence in his team,
providing them adequate resources and training and resolving the
issues that plagued the team. Finally, we see Mumbai safe and
thriving.
 
Retired Assistant Commissioner of Police, Dashrath Avhad, who
worked with Sivanandhan in the Crime Branch says, “Sivanandhan
was one of the finest officers in the Maharashtra police force. He
was a dynamic leader and always handled a crisis situation by
leading from the front. Dealing with the gangsters was not easy, but
Sivanandhan was a true leader and never let his officers down.”
 
Associates with elders
 
While Sivanandhan was making an action plan, he consulted elders
(experts) from various fields. For instance, he frequently met and
drew inspiration from senior police officers such as Sarva Shri KF
Rustomji, Julio Rebeiro, VK Saraf, SV Bhave, S Ramamurthy, SK
Bapat, Satish Sahney, Arvind Inamdar and MR Reddy, among others.
 
Truthful in speech
 
Sivanandhan’s response to the shooting of the poor villager who was
mistaken as a Naxalite is a case in point. Sivanandhan had the
opportunity to conceal the facts and declare the person a Naxalite,
which is in fact, a common practice in such cases. However, he
accepted the mistake and was truthful in speech.
 
Does not break promises

 
The biggest promise you give is to yourself. We find Sivanandhan
was happy that the promise to ensure security to the people was
delivered. He could recall the lady on television who was fearful for
her husband’s life and be assured that he had succeeded in quelling
her fears. He did not break the promise he had made to himself.
 
Grateful
 
Sivanandhan was always grateful to the people who supported him
in achieving his objectives, be it his team members, the senior
officials who empowered him, lawyers or other experts. He
maintains that all success was possible due to team effort. With this
humility, one rises in his career too. Otherwise, he would not have
risen to the position of Director General of Police.
 
Desirous of training
 
Sivanandhan is a person who is always ready to learn and explore.
Post the 26/11 Mumbai terror attack, his task was to create world-
class security systems and processes in India. He even invited Israeli
specialists and experts from IB (Intelligence Bureau) and other
Central police organizations. This shows his eagerness to learn from
other experts. Wherever he worked during his years of service,
Sivanandhan invited experts such as Prof Rooshikumar Pandya, NH
Atreya, Om Kaul, Smt Jaya Rao, Swami Sukhbodananda and other
motivational speakers to give lectures to police officers.
 
Easily approachable
 

Shivaji Tumreddy and his wife’s surrender with their AK-47 rifles
along with  1.5–2 lakh of cash was the result of Sivanandhan’s able
handling of the situation. This shows that people felt comfortable
with him and could trust him. Sivanandhan has the ability to connect
to the common man. Even when someone meets him for the first
time, it is evident how easily approachable he is and he would
immediately address their problems and concerns. This is an
important quality for a leader.
 
   KEYS TO LEADERSHIP   
 
1.   Boost the morale of your people: They will look upon you
for that.
2.   Think out of the box: Be ready to experiment.
3.   Have high moral standards: Personal integrity is the key.
4.   Give resources to people: Money, tools and techniques are
required for every operation.
5.   Admit mistakes: Do not try to cover them up.
The Leader in Me
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 2
 
Amatya
THE MINISTER/MANAGER
 
Swami the king
Amatya the minister
Janpada the country
Durg the fortified city
Kosha the treasury
Dand the army
Mitra the ally
 

PART A
 
THE SECOND SECRET
 
Amatya: The Manager
 
IN THE ARTHASHASTRA, the importance of a minister is emphasized
repeatedly. In fact, Chapter 8 in Book 1 is titled Amatyautpatti,
meaning “appointment of ministers”.
 
Who is an amatya? He can be called a mantri or a minister. His
counterpart in the corporate world is the manager. There is a
difference, yet there are similarities between leaders and managers.
Depending on the context, every leader is a manager for someone
and every manager is a leader for someone else.
 
Let us take an example. The CEO of a company is the leader. If the
vice-president (VP) of the company manages a part of the work for
the CEO, the VP becomes the minister or manager. However, the VP
is also a leader to his team members. His subordinates, such as the
assistant vice-president, become his ministers.
 
Similarly, the CEO is the manager or the minister for the chairman of
the company. He reports to the company board and manages the
organization.
 
A person who manages a hotel as an employee is the husband and
head of the family at home. Thus, he is a leader in his home. A
person working in the IT department of a company may not have to
worry about company finances. But when he has to manage a family
at home, he has to understand the basic concepts of finance to pay

the bills and manage expenses. Therefore, all managers are leaders
and all leaders are managers in different contexts.
 
In this chapter, we will discuss the qualities of a minister, whom we
will call a manager. You can work towards developing these qualities
to become successful in life.
 
Before we do that, let us look at why companies require managers,
or why a king requires his amatya or ministers. That will also explain
why a management degree is in great demand today, why fresh
management graduates get such high salaries and rewarding
opportunities and why business or B-schools are a flourishing
industry.
 
In Book 1, Chapter 7, Verse 9 of the Arthashastra, Chanakya says,
 
“Rulership can be successfully carried out (only) with the help of
associates. One wheel alone does not turn. Therefore, he (the ruler)
should appoint ministers and listen to their opinion.”
 
Let us delve deeper into this verse.
 
The help of associates: Look at the situation from the point of
view of the king. He has to manage a large kingdom, which is
impossible to do alone. Anyone who thinks he can do it all by himself
can never grow in life. Leaders know the importance of teamwork.
 
In the olden days, the king had associates in the form of his friends,
advisors, teachers, mentors and seniors. In India, we have the
concept of the king being advised by his gurus. These are strong
associates.
 
One wheel alone does not turn: Chanakya gives an analogy
here. If there is only one wheel in a bullock cart, the cart keeps
going in circles. There is movement, but no progress. There is
action, but no direction.

 
Vehicles that have to carry heavy cargo and lots of people have
many wheels. The bigger the vehicle, more the wheels required and
the stronger they should be. Heavy trucks sometimes have 40–50
wheels to transport heavy machinery.
 
Remember this: One wheel alone does not turn.
 
Appoint ministers: Therefore, Chanakya suggests appointing
ministers. The number of ministers required depends on the size of
the kingdom and the volume of responsibilities the king handles.
 
A similar situation exists in the business world. If a person owns a
single hotel, only one manager may be required to manage it. But
the owner of a chain of hotels may require many more to take care
of the operations of each of the hotels, separately and collectively.
 
However, owners themselves are often managers. First-generation
businessmen especially cannot understand the difference between
owning and managing a business. Once you understand the
difference, your business starts to flourish.
 
For example, the owner-manager of a restaurant will take customers’
orders, make the bills and serve the customers. This is good for a
start, when the owner must make efforts to learn the ground reality.
But the next step is to get a manager who runs the show, so that
the owner can focus on thinking about the future of the business.
 
The owner needs to think about business expansion, potential
business opportunities, cost minimization, sources of manpower
supply, customer satisfaction, profit maximization and other such
areas. However, if he works in the restaurant every day from
morning to evening, where is the time to think about these critical
questions?
 
Therefore, appointing a manager who takes care of the details frees
the owner for “thinking time”. Leaders understand this. That is why

they are leaders.
 
However, for that to happen, the first requirement is to trust your
people. If you do not trust your managers, you will never delegate
work to them, and will not have the time to become a leader.
 
An ability to trust others and others being able to trust you are
important qualities a leader has to develop. Along with that, make
sure you consider your managers as equals. Just because they
report to you does not mean they are not intelligent or have to be
treated disrespectfully.
 
In the previous chapter, we saw that one of the qualities of a leader
is humility. Be grateful to your people and treat them with respect.
 
Listen to their opinion: Chanakya says, “Appoint ministers, and
listen to their opinion.”
 
After you have recognized the need for managers, the next step is to
listen to them. Listening is different from hearing. It is an open-
minded approach towards the other person while he is speaking.
 
Each of us is conditioned to think in a certain way. We build the
realities of our life based on our experiences. But in listening, you
give yourself a challenge to be ready to understand the other
person. You acknowledge that both you and the other person may
be right; or your reasoning may be wrong and the other person may
be right. You open your mind to different possibilities.
 
Managers are not machines. They too are continuously thinking and
applying their minds to the job. They may have insights that they
want to share with you. They have a hold over ground realities; they
are the eyes and ears of your organization. But all this experience is
useless if you do not “listen” to their opinion.
 
In the industrial era, productivity was measured based on how many
units were produced through machines each day. Speed was

important. To achieve speed, one had to stop thinking and work
mechanically. However, Toyota changed that when their focus
became quality, rather than just quantity. Now, any person in the
assembly line was permitted to reject the product if the quality was
not found satisfactory. The product did not need to reach the Quality
Control department for the final inspection and the decision to
accept or reject. Every person in the assembly line, therefore,
became a “thinking” person whose opinion was respected.
 
Today’s world is one of ideas and innovation. Therefore, the leader
must listen to the opinions of his managers. This time- tested
formula of Chanakya is relevant today in every situation.
 
When the king faces a problem, he is supposed to discuss it with his
ministers and then take a decision.
 
You must have heard the saying, “A king is as good as the advice he
gets.” In today’s situation too, you need to take inputs from the
people in your team before taking the final call. These ministers and
managers help you to think from various perspectives, which you
may overlook if you are analyzing a problem alone.
 
The police system too has its amatyas. As a Commissioner of Police,
Sivanandhan had his managers in the form of DCPs (Deputy
Commissioners of Police) handling various zones. He would call
meetings with them on a regular basis and use their information and
insights to learn about what was happening in the city.
 
This helped him build his knowledge base. He took every report and
every piece of information seriously and integrated information given
by the various DCPs to get a complete picture. He also had his own
informers to cross-verify the facts. The key was to keep an open
mind and respect each piece of information that flowed to him,
directly or indirectly.
 
Had it not been for his effective and efficient “ministers” who stood
by him during testing times, Sivanandhan would not have been

successful in his career.
 
A king can never be complete without his ministers. And a minister is
never complete without a king. They are interdependent, like
reflections of each other. Their rapport with each other contributes
to an organization’s rapid growth. Their mutual trust is the push
required to achieve results.
 
Also, it is important to note that every manager has the potential to
become a leader. And every leader was a good manager in the past.
You start as a good follower to become a good leader.
 
Take a break now and think about what you have read so far.
 
This book encourages you to “think”, as according to Chanakya,
thinking is the first quality a leader has to develop. This method of
thinking is called Aanvikshiki, which also means philosophy and an
intelligent person.
 
As you take a break, here is a question to think about: How much
time in a day do you spend in thinking? Do you have a dedicated
time in your daily routine only to think?
 
Thinking about thinking, makes you a great leader.
 

PART B
 
ACCORDING TO CHANAKYA
 
Management
 
THE ARTHASHASTRA FOLLOWS the unique and interesting method
of using sutras (verses) to teach. These brilliant one-liners are full of
deep insights. So too, is the case with defining management in Book
1, Chapter 15, Verse 42:
 
“The means of starting undertakings, the excellence of men and
material, (suitable) apportionment of place and time, provision
against failure (and) accomplishment of work – this is deliberation
(management) in its five aspects”.
 
In this one-liner, Chanakya defines the five principles of
management:
 
1.   The means of starting undertakings (assignments/projects)
2.   Excellence of men and materials
3.   Suitable place and time
4.   Provision against failure
5.   Accomplishment of work
All management theories and concepts are based on certain
principles. These are the basic foundations on which we evaluate the
efficiency of the manager, the productivity of the organization and its
success in achieving objectives. Voluminous books are available to
define and describe management. However, Chanakya has given the
most refined view of management in a single verse.

 
Let us look at the five principles of management defined by
Chanakya.
 
   The Means of Starting Undertakings
(Assignments/Projects)
 
Every organization needs projects or assignments to manage and
complete. However, the best manager is one who not only takes up
a project given by his supervisor, but also creates projects on his
own. Stephen Covey in his book, The Seven Habits of Highly
Effective People describes this as being “proactive”. This is an
important quality for a good leader and a good manager.
 
   Excellence of Men and Materials
 
A manager has access to resources, which are to be used at his
discretion in order to accomplish tasks. These are the people who
work under his direction and the tools used by him and his team. A
good manager must be able to make his team highly productive and
ensure optimum utilization of materials like machinery, space,
budgets, etc.
 
   Suitable Place and Time
 
Management is about deciding the right place and the right time to
make your move. Like in warfare, timing is very crucial. When to
attack the enemy is not an easy question to answer. It requires
careful planning, analysis and also patience. This sense of the right
“timing” comes from one’s own experience, knowledge and guidance
from other sources.
 
   Provision against Failure
 

Every move has to be carefully planned taking two alternatives into
consideration: the best-case scenario of success and the worst-case
scenario of total failure. A backup plan is required in each move.
One needs to be prepared with alternative solutions in case of
failures. A businessman was once asked the reason for his success,
to which he replied, “I take into consideration failures at each stage.
I plan alternative moves even before I start the venture.” It is like
having Plan A, Plan B and Plan C in place.
 
   Accomplishment of Work
 
Finally, management is about achieving results. It is very important
to have parameters to check whether you have achieved what you
set out to do. Every project is started with a certain objective in
mind. The process may evolve as the project is executed, but finally,
the target has to be achieved, even if the route taken to reach there
is different from what was initially planned.
 
   Qualities of a Good Manager According to Chanakya
 
The professional man is in essence, one who provides service. It is a
service that wells up from the entire complex of his personality. In a
very real sense, his professional service cannot be separate from his
personal being. He has no goods to sell, no land to till, his only asset
is himself.
 
If he does not contain the quality of integrity, he is worthless. If he
does, he is priceless. The value is either nothing or it is infinite.
 
So, do not try to set a price on yourselves. Do not debase yourselves
by equating your souls to what they will bring in the market.
 
Like love, talent is useful only in its expenditure and is never
exhausted.
 

Certain it is that man must eat. So, set what price you must on your
service. But, never confuse the performance, which is great, with the
compensation, be it money, power or fame.
 
– Judge Elbert P. Tuttle
 
The professional man is indeed of great value in every organization.
The professional manager in today’s organizations should also reflect
the qualities of integrity and service-oriented action. His only asset is
himself.
 
We have seen in the previous chapter that the leader has to be self-
motivated and inspiring. He is a solid rock that stands in the midst of
the storm around. He is the lighthouse that gives direction to others.
He is the silver lining in the dark cloud.
 
The manager — Chanakya’s amatya — also needs to possess these
qualities and more. So, let us go once again to the Arthashastra and
look at the qualities of an ideal minister.
 
In Book 6, Chapter 1, Verses 4–6, Chanakya states that the qualities
of an amatya are:
 
   Desire to learn
   Power of retention
   Thorough understanding
   Intentness on truth
   Ability to lead an army
   Sweetness of speech
To understand these qualities and their significance, you should
visualize yourself in a managerial position. Do you possess these
qualities? If not, how can you develop these?
 
Also note that when you compare the qualities of a leader and
manager, you will find many similarities. As stated above, they are
reflections of each other.
 

   Desire to learn
 
A leader is supposed to learn continuously; so should a manager.
Without continuous learning, there is stagnation in a manager’s
career and boredom sets in. In offices, there is often rejoicing at the
thought, “Thank God, it’s Friday!” Why? Does God differentiate
between Sunday and Monday? Does the sun say, “Because it is Sun-
day today, I will shine brighter and on other days, I will not do my
work?”
 
When you get stuck in a routine, are trapped in fixed ways of
thinking and doing things, and there is no new knowledge or
learning, boredom is bound to set in. Then, you require breaks,
weekends and vacations.
 
This is not to say that you should not have holidays and time with
family and friends. But every day can be a day of celebration; your
Monday can be as beautiful as Saturday or Sunday.
 
Ever since the age of 27, when I started on my own journey of
becoming an entrepreneur, I have forgotten the difference between
weekdays and weekends.
 
Every day is a celebration because every day, I am learning. And I
have never got bored of myself. I hate the days when I have no
work to do. That does not mean I am a workaholic. I love my work
and find joy in it. I read books, listen to music, watch movies and go
on long drives with my friends and family.
 
A manager can also achieve this if work is not considered a “task” to
be completed, but an opportunity to learn. One may think it is easy
when you are the owner of a company or your own boss. This is not
true. I know people who are not owners but professionals and
managers. But they do not live their lives from one weekend to the
next, one increment to the next or one job to the next.
 

They have the desire to learn. They work very hard and learn a lot.
They learn by reading official reports, listening to others, traveling or
resolving a problem in their companies. They draw on the
experience of seniors and juniors, their children, families, friends and
their mentors. They learn from professional journals, newspapers,
television channels, radio, plays and movies; and from meetings,
seminars and professional courses. They imbibe life lessons from
watching the sunrise, a passing cloud or the movement of an ant.
Because they have a learning mindset, they learn from anything and
everything.
 
The whole universe becomes their university. And in that state of
mind, they become deep thinkers, meditative in nature, and are able
to find solutions to complex problems.
 
   Power of retention
 
Someone asked me in a seminar, “What is the greatest problem in
our life?” “Not being able to remember and apply the knowledge you
have when the time comes,” was my instant reply.
 
In ancient Indian scriptures, there are many stories where a brilliant
student is cursed by his teacher, “When the time to apply the
knowledge comes, you will forget it!” This was also the curse given
to Karna, one of the greatest warriors in the Mahabharata, by his
guru, Parashurama, when the latter found out that Karna had lied to
him.
 
As a result, Karna’s rival Arjuna, who was less skilled than him, killed
him. Karna was an expert in military warfare, but could not recollect
what he wanted at the right time and had to lose his life.
 
Therefore, to retain knowledge and recollect it when it is “really”
required is a skill a manager has to develop. Swami Chinmayananda
said this jovially, “Before the exams I am wise, after the exams I am
wise, but during the exams I am other-wise.”

 
Retention is not just memory skills or reproducing what you have
learnt. It is going into your past database, selecting what is really
required, diagnosing the current problem, choosing what is relevant
and making an action plan, in the shortest possible time. Fighter
pilots have to decide in a split second. Policemen have to take a call
for action here and now.
 
Have you ever faced an instance in your life when you were all alone
in a very difficult situation, and when all your training, knowledge
from books you had read and all the advice you had received came
handy in that very moment of judgement?
 
That is retention in the true sense. That is wisdom in action. No
reference time, no consulting time, no brainstorming activity is
possible. There is only you and the moment of truth. You take that
key decision and jump into the fire and the unknown power in you
awakens. The leader in you is born.
 
   Thorough understanding
 
Understanding has to be thorough and complete. We find young
lovers often saying “I love you”, but these are superficial words. Real
love comes from understanding one another completely and
unconditionally. An old couple really understands the meaning of
love. When the old man is hungry, his wife understands. He does not
have to ask for food. When she is upset, he understands. There is
perfect mental tuning between the two.
 
In the same way, there has to be thorough understanding between
the leader and the manager. It does not come from day one. It
requires time being spent with each other, working with each other
for a long period of time. But when this understanding reaches its
maturity, there are no communication gaps any more, no “whys” and
“ifs”, no complaints of “he did it, not me”. There is only silence and a
deep sense of calmness between the two.

 
The king and the minister, or the leader and the manager, have to
reach that level of maturity. They work together for a higher
purpose. They strive together to achieve a common goal. They may
disagree on the methods and have different points of view, but their
objective is not forgotten.
 
Disagreement between two people does not mean they do not
understand each other. In fact, Santrupt Misra from the Aditya Birla
group said in the film Chanakya Speaks, “If the king and the minister
agree on the same thing, then one is redundant.” “Strength lies in
differences not similarities,” said the management guru, Stephen
Covey.
 
   Intentness on truth
 
Truth is one, but it has various dimensions. A true manager will try
to understand this complete truth. The story of the elephant and the
five blind men is relevant here. While each blind man touched a
different part of the elephant and described it differently as a pillar,
broom, fan, wall and so on, the person with eyesight said, “All of you
are right from your standpoint, yet the elephant is very different.”
Each had his limited perspective, but missed the big picture. It
required the wisdom of a person with full vision to see the complete
truth.
 
A manager needs to develop this “big picture” vision. Many people
will provide different perspectives to a given problem or situation. He
needs to gather all this information and collate it into a larger story.
In this process, the truth is discovered.
 
Good managers have to be aware of and respect the perspectives of
different individuals. But their intentness has to be on the truth,
ensuring that the objective is not forgotten.
 

Intentness on truth also means the ability to take the next step. If
you have reached the conclusion that a certain action is required
after arriving at the truth, as a manager, you need to implement
your findings.
 
For example, Mahatma Gandhi was convinced that non-violence was
the way to freedom. But no one would accept his theory if it did not
lead to results. He had to demonstrate his “experiments with truth”
in thought and action. He did that through his role in India’s freedom
struggle, and attained fame and respect in India and the world. He
said, “My life is my message.”
 
   Ability to lead an army
 
A manager has a team that executes tasks. The minister has to
ensure that his team implements the king’s decision. But the team
members will do that only if they accept the minister or manager
himself as their leader.
 
Therefore, a manager or minister has to be an inspiring leader.
 
True leadership is inspirational. A manager cannot tell his supervisor,
“My team does not listen to me; please help.” A manager is a leader,
and therefore, cannot complain.
 
Leadership is never demanded, but commanded. Authority should
never be imposed; people should accept it voluntarily.
 
You should be like the pied piper. Your team should be mesmerized
by the music of your vision and be ready to do anything at your
command. This is charismatic leadership. This is transformational
leadership. These are the qualities a manager also needs to develop.
 
Remember the famous saying, “People do not leave organizations;
they leave their bosses.” That is, the boss was not inspirational
enough to make them stick to their companies.

 
Be the manager who has the ability to lead a team like an army fired
up to take up any challenge. The manager in you has to transform
into a leader.
 
   Sweetness of speech
 
Sweetness of speech does not mean being nice to everyone. It is
almost impossible to be so in the police force while handling law and
order, terrorism and organized crime. One cannot be uniformly
sweet. But wherever it is possible, it is important to keep it simple,
to communicate the most complex problems in a simple manner to
the people through the media and the police force.
 
Not all people in an organization have the ability to understand what
the leader is thinking. The manager plays a very critical role here.
The manager is the bridge between the senior management or
board of directors, and the staff and laborers. The manager is like
the filling in a sandwich. And in a sandwich, it is the filling that
makes the difference.
 
In the same way, the manager has to be the sweet filling. He has
the responsibility to convey what the organization needs to the last
man. Until each person in your team is connected to the vision of
the organization, they will not perform.
 
In the police force, the constable is given the same training about
the Constitution of India that is given to the Director General of
Police. This connects the first and the last person in the team for a
common purpose.
 
On the other side, the problems of the staff and the foot soldiers
also need to be conveyed to the senior management. Here too, the
manager plays a critical role. The ability to present the problems of
your team with a solution to the senior management and to get an
approval is a skill in itself, be it getting a budget approved for a

project or organizing a picnic. Getting that done and making your
team happy is an essential part of management and leadership.
 
In the following chapters, you will see examples of how Sivanandhan
got his team in the police force to work for him. But for that, he had
to get many projects sanctioned by the home minister and
government. To do that, he had to be a good communicator as well.
 
Truth is important, but the ability to communicate the truth in a
palatable way is more important.
 

PART C
 
LEADERSHIP IN ACTION
 
Managing the 2 Lakh Police Force
 
AS A LEADER, Sivanandhan’s job was to manage the strong force of
2 lakh policemen and policewomen in Maharashtra. He was a leader
for the police force; while for the government, he was a manager
whose task was to manage law and order. He worked for the
government of Maharashtra for the best part of his life and retired at
the senior-most position of Director General of Police (DGP) of the
state.
 
Sivanandhan admits, “When I look back at such a career, I cannot
thank the various government officials, politicians and other
bureaucrats at the local, state, national level enough for the
immense support I got from them. I am so overwhelmed by the
results that given a chance, I would like to work all over again in the
same police force.”
 
Most IPS officers are highly intelligent people who made the choice
to enter public life. They have been given world-class training to run
and manage huge workforces. Their task as a leader and a manager
can be compared to that of running a multinational organization.
However, the challenges are immense as compared to what one
would encounter in a corporate career.
 
Sivanandhan speaks about how he managed such challenges. “For
me ‘real management’ starts with ‘personnel management’ and to

‘accept change’ as it comes. And being imaginative and ready for
changes. Resisting change is something that stops us from growth.”
 
Let us see how Sivanandhan’s experiences as a leader and a
manager embody the qualities of a good manager, as described by
Chanakya.
 
   Desire to learn
 
One of the biggest challenges is dealing with the drastic changes
that come with transfers. Unlike in a corporate career, where you
know your company and your boss, where you are in a position to
even interview and recruit your subordinates; in an IPS officer’s
case, everything is unknown. He may simply be informed one fine
morning about his transfer from a metro city to the jungles of a
Naxalite area and may have no idea about the culture or
environment of the new place.
 
The political authorities in the new place may be different from those
in the previous posting. They may be from a different party or
background. The immediate senior to whom the officer would report
may get transferred or promoted himself. The subordinates may
have been working in the area for over 20 years, while the area
would be completely new for this officer.
 
Moreover, the officer’s family too has to adapt to such transfers. The
time given to vacate the current house and join the new place of
posting is very short. This brings a set of challenges for the family.
The transfer order is not just a piece of paper, but an instruction that
can have an impact on every aspect of life. In an officer’s career,
transfers may sometimes be decided by the seniors. At other times,
the officer may have to take decisions related to the transfers of
thousands of men and women who are his subordinates.
 
However, the police force is trained to face and accept this reality.
Those who accept every new challenge and posting with a smile are

never affected. They deliver results in every place they go. It is like
making a completely new painting every time, because the canvas
itself is new. To manage that, you have to be an artist and a
strategist at the same time.
 
By the brush of your past experience, and the various colors of a
completely new team, you start to approach the empty canvas —
your new posting — with a fresh outlook and a hope to transform
the place that you go to.
 
When a police officer goes to a new place, the challenge is not only
for the officer, but also for the people working there. They may
wonder about the officer and his agenda. He is like a foreign body in
an existing system. There is initial resistance, which is natural. But if
the officer becomes the positive change agent at every place, by the
time the officer leaves, the people there hope he could have stayed
back a little longer. That is the best gift for any officer while
departing from his posting or retiring from his career.
 
Sivanandhan remarks, “In my tenure of 36 years in the service, I
never lost my balance even for a single moment when the news of
transfers came. I was ever ready to pack my bag with the family to
an unknown, yet positive future. I was transferred 20 times and
changed 26 houses.” This experience made Sivanandhan and his
family strong and adaptable. It also helped them learn new
languages, acquaint themselves with new ethnic groups and
cultures.
 
Despite his numerous transfers, he had the ability to learn from the
experiences in every transfer. Thus, he could perfect his
management and leadership skills every time there was a new
posting or transfer. Apart from managing these personal challenges,
the officer’s main task is to manage the workforce at any new
posting.
 

In the police force, one of the greatest challenges is administration.
As a government department, administration is a huge machine that
operates as the backbone. If you have ever visited a police station,
you would have witnessed the administrative challenges the
department faces.
 
There is lack of resources such as stationery, photocopiers and
computers. Even though administrative reforms are taking place, the
pace is very slow. While there is talk about e-governance and
paperless offices, the ground reality is very different. Even though
the use of technology is encouraged, the policeman who is on duty
for 12 hours hardly gets time to attend new courses to upgrade his
technology skills.
 
However, as a management researcher, I personally believe that
efficient administration starts with the leader and the manager in
charge. It is not just about paperwork; it is about attitude in that
particular office. Especially in government offices, if the person in
charge decides to help you, the problem can be resolved in a matter
of minutes. If not, you will not get the required paper or permission
for years. If the IPS or IAS officer decides to do so, he can transform
the whole place. Otherwise, it is just another posting and the officer
can give excuses such as “Our systems are like that; what can I do?”
 
Sivanandhan’s desire to learn came handy here as well. It is to his
credit that he made it a point throughout his career to simplify the
administration process for the common man. He believed in world-
class administration and even obtained world-class systems and
process certifications as well as ISO certifications for many of the
institutions that he created. He got eight police stations in Thane city
accredited with ISO certifications. Standard operating processes
(SOPs) were adopted at these institutions, which will be beneficial
for generations to come.
 
When he was in charge of the immigration process for four years
(1987–91), his biggest achievement was changing the atmosphere

of that office from a typical police office with “No, No” all the time to
“Yes, Yes” all the way. Sivanandhan was able to help millions of
people get their passports, visas and various registrations. In fact, all
the foreigners who were here would get their visa extensions
through him. That not only brought him into the limelight, but a lot
of these people also became his friends.
 
The Special Branch 2 office located behind St Xavier’s College, in
Mumbai, used to look like a regular government office, overflowing
with dusty files which could not be retrieved at will. There was no
visitors’ room. This was the office where all foreigners residing in
Mumbai would get their visa extension and residential permits. It
created a very bad impression on the expats. So, the first thing
Sivanandhan did was to change the look of the office by creating a
visitors’ room equipped with proper furniture and a reception desk
managed by well-trained women staff. He also created a proper
record room where all the files were neatly stacked and could be
easily retrieved. On the ground floor, he created an easily accessible
“one window system” where all short-term extensions were granted
within 24 hours.
 
Earlier, visa extensions were granted for three months only and all
foreigners had to surrender their residential permit (RP) at airport
immigration, every time they traveled. Now, Sivanandhan arranged
for a proper RP that looked more like a passport and allowed them
to retain their RPs so that they did not need to come and collect
them after every trip. The foreigners were allowed long-term
extensions too, so the number of visitors hanging around the office
reduced to a great extent. For the first time, office records were
computerized.
 
Several incidents from this tenure of Sivanandhan’s are worth
mentioning. Once, he received intimation that some Japanese Red
Army girls would pass through the airport. Sivanandhan personally
led the team to identify and challenge the girls. The team found that
five Mizoram girls were carrying brown sugar to Madrid using fake

Japanese passports! When confronted with a Japanese traveler
asking them questions, the truth spilled out. Checking their baggage
revealed 60 kilos of contraband.
 
There was another occasion where an assassin allegedly belonging
to the Abu Nidal group had illegally entered Mumbai and opened fire
with deadly UZI guns on the Air France crew inside their bus. He had
also hurled live hand grenades inside the bus. The pilot was shot in
the stomach, but the assailant was caught by two daring
immigration officers at the Sahar international airport. Sustained
interrogation resulted in the conviction of the foreigner under TADA.
 
Sivanandhan created a special investigation cell with handpicked
officers and they detected around 350 Sri Lankans every year trying
to migrate to European countries with false passports. Many Indians
trying to migrate to the USA with fake passports were detected by a
special squad. The US government was so happy that they sent a
deputy secretary, James Warden, to personally appreciate and
convey the US government’s gratitude.
 
Sivanandhan arranged many special training sessions for the
immigration officers, including training on soft skills like welcoming
foreigners in their mother tongue, giving them quick clearance and
arranging a special handout that would give them complete
directions on the rules and regulations.
 
The mammoth effort put in by the immigration staff during the
evacuation of a large number of Indians from Kuwait during the war
is unforgettable.
 
The police office has a corporate ambience even now, where officers
wear a tie and are ever willing to help with a smile. At the airport
too, things have vastly improved.
 

When Sivanandhan was Additional Commissioner of Police (crime),
computerization was another major achievement. In fact,  2.5 crore
was spent on linking the entire Mumbai police network into one unit.
Another great achievement is updating all crime records. Thus,
criminal information, which was earlier maintained manually, has
been computerized and is now part of institutional memory.
 
Sivanandhan also ensured the smooth functioning of internal
administration throughout his career, which included making sure
that salaries were disbursed on time, and postings and promotions
were not delayed. This made a huge impact on the overall efficient
functioning of the system and boosted the morale of the police
force.
 
   Power of retention
 
Apart from ensuring that the systems work well, the leader and
manager needs to connect to people at a personal level too. The
human touch is required while managing an office. Human beings
cannot live in isolation and need to be recognized and appreciated.
 
One of the challenges for the Western world is the individualistic
culture. Once, when I was travelling abroad a native citizen told me,
“If someone meets with an accident, our traffic monitoring system is
so good that an ambulance will arrive in less than two minutes.” “In
fact, no one is inconvenienced because they know help is on its
way.”
 
Sivanandhan describes how he made the human touch possible. He
made it a point to remember the names of the people in his team. “I
used to call everyone by name. I made an effort to remember
everyone by their first name. One may wonder if it is possible to
remember the names of a police force as large at 2 lakh? No way. I
am not advocating that each of us should become master computers
in memorizing names of people. But you can at least make the effort
to memorize the names of the few people directly reporting to you.”

There is a saying that the sweetest sound to any person is his own
name. Remembering the names of people who work with you is a
good practice.
 
He fondly recollects attending the marriage of a young constable
who worked with him in Mumbai. Sivanandhan came all the way
from Nagpur to attend this wedding. The cop’s joy knew no bounds
when he saw his old boss sitting in the front row.
 
   Thorough understanding
 
The people who directly report to you are your amatyas.
 
Sivanandhan followed a simple policy when it came to his amatyas
and the police force, “I will train them so well that they will manage
the law and order situation well and effectively handle crime
control.”
 
Sivanandhan had a thorough understanding of what human beings
want. When a person is not worried about the basic necessities, he
will focus on his work and deliver results. Receiving the salary on
time, housing, food and children’s education are important matters
to every person. When you manage this, they manage your work.
 
Sivanandhan subsidized the education for policepersons’ children,
created safe police stations, created schools at Thane and even in
Naxal-affected areas like Gadchiroli, Chandrapur and many more.
 
Thus, his employees thought of him as a leader, who took care of
them, who understood their problems and offered solutions; who
didn’t just talk, but took action.
 
People do not understand what is in your mind and heart. They
understand what you deliver, what you do for them. If you create an
environment where they are being taken care of, employees also
work with more commitment.

 
   Intentness on truth
 
There is no point beating around the bush when the time has come
to deliver. Sivanandhan had to take tough calls in handling criminals
and even his own men. He had the ability to call a spade a spade. If
it was required, he would also suspend or dismiss members of his
own team.
 
Dashrath Avhad, retired ACP adds, “Officers who did not have a
good conduct were transferred so as to facilitate smooth functioning
of the Crime Branch.”
 
Sivanandhan once dismissed a Senior Inspector under Section 311 of
the Constitution. He explains, “Just like a cancerous growth in a
body part must be removed, team members who have become like
cancerous growths must be removed to ensure the health and
effectiveness of the team.”
 
   Ability to Lead an Army
 
The next step is to empower your subordinates to take charge. A
good leader never withholds power. He understands that true power
comes 
from 
empowering 
others. 
Today, 
the 
buzzword 
is
decentralization. Government and public organizations also grow by
not restricting the juniors, but allowing them to take spot decisions.
The toe has to be as important as the head. In today’s world, where
information is available at the speed of thought, it is important that
your subordinates also take quick decisions.
 
However, to take up the responsibility when things go wrong, and to
accept the mistakes of the juniors as your mistakes, is leadership.
 
Sivanandhan says, “When my team was executing shootouts of
gangsters, I was empowering them to take immediate decisions. I

also had to give them the courage and confidence that I am with
you — that moral support is required.”
 
   Sweetness of speech
 
Sivanandhan had the ability to communicate in a pleasant and
effective manner, whether with his subordinates, the press or his
seniors. Being sweet does not mean using sugar-coated words. It
means the ability to deliver the truth tactfully and effectively.
 
When certain approvals are needed, such as for the application of
new rules, effective communication about the need for new rules is
necessary. Sivanandhan’s success in communication can be gauged
by the number of new policies he introduced for his team and the
police force throughout his career.
 
Another example of pleasant and effective communication is from
the time when Sivanandhan was a police chief. He recollects that a
lady came to him once and was asked to take a chair. She refused.
When he insisted, she said, “Sir, how can I sit in front of you?”
“What is the problem?” he asked. Lowering her voice, she said, “Sir,
I am in the profession of selling my body. I am not equal to you in
status.” He said “Until you sit down and have a cup of tea, I will not
listen to you.” She had come to complain of her husband ill-treating
her. By putting her at ease and talking to her respectfully,
Sivanandhan was able to help her.
 
Various people came to him with various problems — there were film
stars, rich business tycoons, community leaders and even college
students. He had an open-door policy and treated everyone with
respect. That is how Sivanandhan managed his team and his work.
 
   TIPS FOR GOOD MANAGEMENT   
 

1.   Be prepared for change: Never resist new assignments or
projects.
2.   Manage yourself first: Self-management is important for
managing others.
3.   Ensure good administration: Systems and processes should
be in place.
4.   Know people by name: It provides the personal touch.
5.   Empower people: Encourage your subordinates to take
decisions.
The Leader in Me
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 3
 
Janpada
THE CITIZENS/CUSTOMERS
 
Swami the king
Amatya the minister
Janpada the country
Durg the fortified city
Kosha the treasury
Dand the army
Mitra the ally
 

PART A
 
THE THIRD SECRET
 
Janpada: Citizens or Customers
 
GOOD GOVERNANCE HAS been explained as, “Till the last man in
the last village is not happy, the work of the government is not
done.” Similarly, until every citizen is not feeling safe and secure, the
work of the police is not complete.
 
Once, King Chandragupta Maurya was thinking about the fact that
everything in his life was now directed and controlled by Chanakya.
His daily timetable of what to do, who to meet, what food to eat,
and even the important decision of who to marry was decided by his
guru.
 
Chandragupta did not seem to have a personal life at all. In utter
frustration, he told Chanakya one day that he would not listen to
him. He wanted his personal space and independence. Though he
was a king, he was also an individual with personal desires. He
asked Chanakya why everything he did, public or personal, was
controlled.
 
Chanakya reminded his able student, “There are two categories of
people in this world who are not blessed with personal happiness —
the king and the teacher. Till every person in the kingdom is not
happy, both cannot take rest.”
 
This may seem like a strong statement for a leader — no personal
life at all. But note that Chanakya, the guru, imposes this rule even

on himself.
 
Both the king and the guru are supposed to dedicate their life to the
welfare of society. Most training programs in companies talk about
work-life balance. But, the fact is that a leader should not
differentiate between work and life.
 
At a breakfast meeting with Jagdish Seth, the renowned
management guru and an advisor to some of the most prominent
world leaders, we were talking about leadership. He too emphasized,
“There cannot be any difference between personal and public life for
a leader in today’s world, especially with the media following him
closely. Personal integrity is important in all spheres of life. When
that happens, there is no internal conflict in the leader’s mind and he
is able to perform better and stay focused on the job.”
 
Leadership has to be practiced 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365
days a year. It is a lifelong commitment.
 
That is why leadership is not only about what you are in public, but
also what you are when the public is not around. It is being true to
your conscience.
 
A leader will have his or her personal life, but it cannot be hidden
from the public eye. This is because the leader sets an example; he
becomes a role model. Therefore, the saying “Yatha raja, tatha
praja” (As the leader, so the citizens).
 
We now come to the third aspect and the most important part of
leadership: Janpada.
 
The Janpada are the citizens of the country. Without them, the
kingdom is not complete. What is a country without people or a
leader without followers? What is a king if there is no one for him to
govern?
 

In the context of the corporate world, Janpada refers to customers
or clients. The prime duty of a company is to serve its customers
well. “The customer is king,” says a popular marketing statement.
Gandhiji also put it well:
 
“A customer is the most important visitor on our premises. He is not
dependent on us. We are dependent on him. He is not an
interruption in our work. He is the purpose of it. He is not an
outsider in our business. He is part of it. We are not doing him a
favor by serving him. He is doing us a favor by giving us an
opportunity to do so.”
 
The key question is whether you have served your customers well
and taken care of them. Most companies today have customer
service departments. Initially, customer service focused on selling
products or services, but today, after-sales service is a more
important component. In an open economy, providing good
customer service is critical, because customers are aware of the
service levels your competitors offer. Therefore, retaining customers
becomes a big challenge if your customer service is not what it
should be.
 
For a leader, it is important to be in touch with the customers on a
regular basis. If you can think like the customer, you will be a good
market leader in your business.
 
Even in governance, the challenge is to understand how citizens
think. If you are able to understand their likes and dislikes, habits,
culture, value systems, needs and aspirations, and give them what
they need, you do not need to worry about your performance in the
next elections.
 
Many politicians, who have understood this psychology of citizens,
are able to win in the elections again and again. Even their future
generations continue to win in the elections. This is not due to

fooling the people by giving false promises. It is the ability to give
the people what they want, without them having to ask for it.
 
To become a leader, one should understand how a leader thinks. And
to understand how a leader thinks, one should understand how the
citizens think.
 
The same thought is reiterated in the Mahabharata, when Bhishma
advises Yudishthira on good governance. He says, “The king should
be focused on his subjects, not the throne. If the subjects don’t
exist, the throne will also not exist.”
 
What should the attitude of a king be?
 
In Book 1, Chapter 19, Verse 34 of the Arthashastra, Chanakya says:
 
“In the happiness of the subjects lies the happiness of the king, and
what is beneficial to the subjects is his own benefit. What is dear to
himself is not beneficial to the king, but what is dear to the subjects
is beneficial to him.”
 
All marketing theories or principles of good governance will find their
culmination in this powerful saying. This most- quoted and well-
accepted theory of Chanakya emphasizes that the happiness of the
people is the happiness of the king.
 
Let us discuss the important aspects of this sutra.
 
   Happiness of subjects
 
To be happy is a great human achievement. Nations across the globe
and world organizations like the United Nations have been working
to define and understand the meaning of happiness to citizens.
 
Happiness has various dimensions — physical, mental and spiritual.
 

Physical: A person who is not physically fit cannot be happy. When
you are unwell, happiness is far from your mind.
 
It is said that “Health is wealth.” The World Health Organization
(WHO) aims for happiness at this level for every citizen of the world.
 
The next level of physical happiness is the availability of adequate
food and water. Nutritious food with good exercise keeps the body
strong and fit.
 
Also required are bodily comforts. The external environment should
be conducive to make you happy. If it is too hot, you need air-
conditioning to feel comfortable. If it is too cold, you require warm
clothes. If your chair is broken, you will not feel comfortable or
happy.
 
Note that comforts at the physical level can be misunderstood as
real happiness. As Swami Chinmayananda says, “You can be in
luxury yet unhappy — luxuriously unhappy.”
 
Therefore, the next aspect of happiness is mental happiness.
 
Mental: Happiness at the mental level is often called “mental
health”. A leader needs to understand that human beings have
sentiments and feelings, and need to be emotionally taken care of.
For this, a leader needs to develop emotional intelligence.
 
Increasing stress levels in modern-day living are a result of being
mentally unhealthy. If mental health issues are not taken care of at
the right time, a person can end up in an asylum or even commit
suicide, as is evident from the increasing number of student suicides
in our country.
 
Creating a caring and accepting atmosphere is required for mental
health. At home, parents need to create an emotional bond with
their children, so that they feel safe. Children should not be afraid to
speak the truth or to face failures. The family should be able to instill

confidence in the child, so that he or she can move beyond the
failure and perform better.
 
In an organization, the leader should strive to create an environment
that provides emotional security to employees and workers. In such
an environment, mistakes are considered as learning steps, the
individual is never blamed for failures and teamwork is given more
importance than a one-man show. People get connected emotionally
and the office becomes a second home. In many cases, people are
so happy with their workplace that they do not complain about
working extra hours.
 
Spiritual: This is the highest level of happiness and happiness in
the real sense. If you are spiritually happy, nothing can move you.
External problems do not matter to you, because such happiness
comes from within and not from outside.
 
At the spiritual level, you are not dependent on physical, mental or
intellectual activities. You are at peace with yourself. Even death
cannot take away your happy state of being.
 
Once Death came to a spiritual master and said, “I am going to take
you.” The saint smiled, “I died long ago; you are only going to kill
the body.”
 
Spiritual happiness comes from the death of the ego, the biggest
enemy in our lives. Once the ego is destroyed, nothing can stop us
from being permanently happy.
 
In India, spiritual happiness has been emphasized since the dawn of
time. Our history is full of stories of kings who even gave up their
kingdoms in search of this true happiness. And leaders who have
understood spiritual happiness become true leaders.
 
For India to fearlessly stand on its feet on the world platform, we
need to connect to the spiritual foundations of our past. In

leadership too, we need to take the highest leap — towards spiritual
leadership.
 
We have seen that happiness has to be achieved at various levels,
and for this to happen, the king or leader must understand all the
dimensions of happiness. A leader cannot shirk his responsibility of
providing physical happiness to his people in the form of food,
clothing and shelter or ignore people’s emotional well-being, on the
pretext that real happiness is spiritual happiness. That is escaping
from reality.
 
As parents take care of their children, the king must tend to his
citizens. Children are first made comfortable at the physical level by
giving them food and other material comforts; then at the mental
and intellectual level by providing care, a house full of warm and
loving people, followed by education and security. And finally, they
are taught spiritual values that will help them stay strong through all
the challenges of life.
 
In most underdeveloped and developing nations, the focus is on the
physical component — food for all, housing, health, roads, security,
jobs and so on. But the government’s work does not end here. There
are many economically developed nations, where suicide rates are
high, social values have eroded and a sense of loneliness is
prevalent. In such countries, while the citizens have achieved
physical happiness, they have to progress to mental and spiritual
happiness.
 
Once JRD Tata, ex-chairman of the Tata group of companies, was
asked, “Do you want India to be an economic superpower?” Came
back his landmark answer, “No, I want India to be a happy country!”
 
Today, India is in a very challenging situation after over six decades
of independence. A part of our society is flourishing economically
with good housing, education and jobs, and all the perks that come
with them. However, a large part of the society is still struggling for

basic survival. Initially it was about roti, kapda aur makan (food,
clothing and shelter), now it is also about bijlee, sadak aur paani
(power, roads and water).
 
The government is investing in projects to tackle these challenges,
such as the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (basic primary and secondary
education for all), rural health development programs, employment
schemes and much more.
 
However, to ensure that India becomes a “happy country”, as JRD
Tata said, leaders have to think about complete happiness for the
people including spiritual happiness, the real goal of a person’s life.
 
   Democratic attitude of the king
 
Apart from “happiness of the people”, Chanakya also refers to
another aspect of happiness in governance, which is the “democratic
attitude” of the king.
 
Is true democracy only a form of governance or much more? Many
countries in the world are still ruled by a king or queen, but their
citizens are happy. Their leaders are progressive thinkers and include
everyone in their plans and schemes of growth. On the other hand,
in some countries that have a democratic form of governance, the
citizens are not happy. India, the largest democracy in the world, is
an example of this.
 
The form of governance is the best in the world. We choose our
leaders and ruling political party every five years. We have one of
the best constitutions in the world. Every single citizen, irrespective
of gender, religion, caste, etc., has a right to vote. The law gives a
fair hearing to even the most hardened criminal in the courts. Such
rights are far from reality in many countries of the world. Yet, people
are unhappy.
 
That is because India lacks only one thing: good leaders.

 
Even though we elect our leaders, we find that our leaders’
“attitude” is not that of great leaders. The ability to think big, take
bold decisions, encourage creativity and efficiency and a fighting
spirit is what makes a great leader.
 
Chanakya teaches leaders about their right attitude.
 
“In the happiness of the subjects lies the happiness of the king.”
This is real democracy. If the leader understands this, he will make
his country happy. But most leaders only think of their own
happiness. What makes a leader happy does not necessarily make
his people happy. But, what makes the people happy should make
him happy.
 
This is not very difficult to understand, if you put yourself in the
shoes of a parent. When a child is crying, the parents do everything
they can to help the child. Once the child is out of pain and the smile
returns on its face, the parents and other family members are also
happy. In the happiness of the child lies the happiness of the
parents.
 
For this attitude to be developed, a leader cannot be selfish. Nor can
he impose his ideas as a command or diktat. The leader has to be
empathetic, caring and loving. Only then can a leader feel the pain
and unhappiness of the citizens and work tirelessly to find solutions
to their problems.
 
In a country where leaders have become dealers, and are thinking of
only filling their own pockets, such an attitude cannot be developed.
 
   Self-interest vs subjects' interest
 
“What is dear to himself is not beneficial to the king,” says
Chanakya. A leader cannot sit back lazily. He has to step out of his
comfort zone and take up difficult tasks, looking at the long-term

benefits of his work. These tasks may not benefit him personally, but
if his people are benefited, he should take them up, irrespective of
his personal likes or dislikes.
 
“What concerns his subjects is what is beneficial to him,” Chanakya
adds. In the long term, we realize that the work we did for others
actually benefits us.
 
No action in the world goes without an impact. No good work goes
unrecognized. As a leader, you should not expect personal benefits,
but the Almighty will give you the due benefits in one form or the
other.
 
Leaders have to understand that no work is big or small. The
attitude with which you work is what ultimately matters. In
leadership, small beginnings are great beginnings.
 
So, treat every customer as the most important customer, every
citizen as the king, every child as your child and every problem that
others face as your problem. You may not be able to solve every
problem, but you can make a difference in the way you handled it. If
a situation has come to you, it is a message from God that you must
contribute. You can create a small ripple that can create a
revolution.
 
Go give it your best shot; make a dent in the universe.
 

PART B
 
ACCORDING TO CHANAKYA
 
Qualities of Good Citizens
 
TO ENSURE SECURITY is the first duty of a leader. The CEO of an
organization is responsible for the employees’ safety. Therefore, in
factories and businesses that require employees round the clock,
such as the business process outsourcing (BPO) industry, the law
requires the company to ensure its employees’ safety. The company
has to make sure that an employee reaches the workplace and back
home safely. Thus, many companies today provide transport to their
staff.
 
Similarly, companies ensure safety in workplaces like factories, with
measures such as posting safety instructions on machines, displaying
posters on safety measures in the work area and training workers
and managers.
 
In the same way, every leader has to ensure the safety of the people
dependent on him. A country has to ensure safety from both internal
and external enemies. The leader has to be very serious about
ensuring safety, for if safety is compromised, the king can lose his
throne. All public awakenings are stories of citizens not feeling safe.
 
While ensuring the safety of citizens, the leader should not be
worried. Instead, he should be concerned. There is a difference
between being worried and being concerned. A worried person sees
a problem and a concerned person solves a problem.
 

If you are aware that there is a safety issue and a security concern,
act on it. Do not just sit there doing nothing.
 
Once the leader has made a clear decision in his mind, a great leap
can be taken forward. Take that decision with the help of others who
have taken those leaps before you. Consult them. Make your
roadmap clear. Decide a goal and stick to it. Do not quit till you
achieve your target.
 
When you as a leader need to ensure the safety of your citizens,
work towards achieving that target with care and seriousness. And
take care of every person — men, women, children, old persons,
young, crippled, mentally challenged, employed and unemployed.
 
The Arthashastra also reiterates that the king must keep his citizens
happy and safe. While doing so, Chanakya defines the qualities that
keep the subjects safe and secure (Book 6, Chapter 1, Verse 8).
 
The qualities of a Janpada (the citizens/customers) are:
 
   Strong position in center and frontiers
   Sustainable in times of distress
   Easy to protect
   Providing excellent means of livelihood
   Capable of bearing taxes and fines
Let us discuss each of these qualities.
 
   Strong position in center and frontiers
 
There is a very famous story about Chanakya guiding his students
about war strategy. Imagine a plate of hot rice. How will you eat it
without burning the fingers? If you put your fingers in the center,
they will get burnt. Instead, you should start taking a little quantity
of rice from the edges of the plate. When you do that, you realize
that towards the borders, the rice is not as hot and you can eat it
comfortably.

 
This is an analogy for war strategy. You never attack the center of a
kingdom — its capital — directly, because security measures are the
most stringent there. It is surrounded by guards because it is the
power center and the residence of the king.
 
Anyone who directly attacks the power center is sure to get killed.
Instead, the strategy of attacking the borders first should be used.
Thus, slowly and steadily, one can eliminate the less powerful people
and reach the center.
 
Therefore, a defense strategy should ensure that not only is the
center secure, but the frontiers have also been strengthened. If the
enemy attacks the center directly, the army is ready to defend and
fight back.
 
However, protecting the frontiers is more critical. Infiltration starts
from the borders of a country. Different countries have different
types of borders, such as mountainous regions, deserts, forest
regions or the sea. Chanakya suggests making forts at all these
check points.
 
In the Arthashastra, we find descriptions of various types of forts
that were built to protect the citizens from enemy attacks. Shivaji
Maharaj from Maharashtra, a very successful king who had studied
the Arthashastra, used these strategies in his warfare plans. In
Maharashtra, there are over 400 forts that Shivaji built at strategic
locations. This is Arthashastra being demonstrated in execution. No
wonder that Shivaji’s warfare strategies are still a benchmark in
military study.
 
Preventing infiltration helps to guard against enemies who are across
the border. These external enemies can be easily identified because
a close watch can be kept over those who want to enter one’s
territory. Chanakya introduced various check posts and passport and
visa systems to control external aggression and infiltration.
 

However, each kingdom also has enemies operating within its
borders. These internal enemies could be spies from rival countries
who have entered the kingdom through illegal routes and have
started destroying the country, or are gathering information to plan
a future war.
 
Internal enemies could also be traitors to the nation who work for
enemy countries. Even though they are the kingdom’s citizens by
nationality, they are funded and supported by the enemy kingdom
and work to achieve its objectives.
 
The leader’s war strategy has to consider all these aspects.
 
In his time, Chanakya created a strong espionage system. This
included a women spy network called the Vishkanya. This network
was comprised of trained and highly intelligent girls and women,
who were state employees and gathered information from the
enemy camp. This network could create turnaround warfare
strategies in the most difficult situations.
 
Chanakya also created an informer network consisting of eunuchs,
beggars, priests, old ladies and community leaders. Information is
the key in strategy.
 
Today, every nation has its own intelligence network and systems.
These agencies work round the clock to protect citizens. They work
in total secrecy and many undercover agents risk their lives for their
jobs. In most cases, even their family members do not know their
real profession. Besides these agencies, the police force plays an
important role in eliminating internal enemies and anti-social
elements, and also gathers information about enemies operating
within the nation’s borders.
 
There is also a danger of the same people turning against their
country and working for the enemy. Therefore, Chanakya also
created a network of counter-spies. Even as every spy kept an eye

on enemies and gathered information, each spy was also watched
over by others who were gathering information about him.
 
This may look confusing and may also reflect a lack of trust among
your own people. But that is the real job of a leader.
 
While you should trust people, trust should not be taken for granted.
That is because there can be no compromise on national security.
The safety of citizens is the utmost priority.
 
   Sustainable in times of distress
 
Natural calamities such as floods, earthquakes, volcanoes and
droughts come without notice and wreak havoc on a nation. A leader
has to understand that these have to be accounted for while
planning for the welfare of the people. Governments have started
creating disaster management groups to handle such calamities.
 
Special budgets and provisions have to be made and experts should
be available to take action immediately. Even these natural
calamities have to be tackled on a war footing.
 
Therefore, Chanakya says a good leader is one who is capable of
survival in times of distress.
 
It may appear difficult to prepare for natural calamities that may or
may not occur in the future, but looking at the past trends of natural
disasters in the region can help. In a city like Mumbai, waterlogging
during the monsoon is quite common. States like Odisha experience
floods every year. In Japan, earthquakes are quite common.
 
By studying these situations, a leader can plan how to handle them
when they reoccur. Learn from past mistakes and plan your future
strategy.
 

Sustainability is the key word here. If the leader does not take care
of the people during times of distress, they will migrate to other
places where they feel safer.
 
In a globalized era, people can easily migrate to other places and
countries. People usually migrate when they have lost faith in the
leadership. Even in times of distress, people will not migrate if they
have confidence on their leader. This trust in the leader and his
abilities in times of distress is the litmus test of leadership.
 
It is said, “When the going gets tough, the tough get going.” That is
leadership. In the toughest situations, the leader is able to provide
hope.
 
Even corporate leaders have been able to demonstrate this. When
the whole world feels the situation is beyond redemption, the leader
walks in and gives the strong message, “Together, we shall win.”
Such leaders uplift people’s spirits and show a way out. They leave a
lasting impact for generations to come.
 
   Easy to protect
 
Citizens feel safe when they get protection quickly. Therefore, the
systems’ response time has to be quick. The leader should be very
efficient and should be able to protect his people with ease.
 
Imagine if you dial an emergency number and there is no response
on the other end. The first feeling is of insecurity. But, if the phone
is answered on the first ring and the person reaches you in a few
minutes, you feel safe and reassured.
 
When a mother is protecting her child, she will make sure the
distance between her and the child is as short as possible. Even
when she is working in the kitchen, her eyes and ears are on the
child. If there is an emergency, she will rush to the child
immediately. She will make sure the child is easy to protect.

 
She is aware of the dangers the child may come across and will try
to keep the child away from these. She will ensure there are no
harmful objects within the child’s reach, the floor is not slippery and
emergency medicines are available in the house. She ensures she
can contact the doctor at a moment’s notice and her social support
system, like elders, is always available.
 
The child may not be aware of all this, but the mother has carefully
planned the protection and safety of the child, as she is continuously
thinking about the child’s welfare.
 
Even when she is sleeping, the mother is subconsciously alert and
vigilant about the child.
 
When there is a problem, she is completely ready to tackle it. Come
what may, she never forgets the fact that the safety and security of
the child is her first and foremost priority. For this, she ensures the
child should be easy to protect.
 
Leaders have to be to their citizens what these mothers are to their
children.
 
   Providing excellent means of livelihood
 
To ensure employment to everyone is a major key result area (KRA)
of any leader or government. Human beings and society have a
deep relationship with economics. Money is important in the daily
transactions of our lives.
 
Therefore, a good leader has to make sure everyone in his kingdom
has excellent means of livelihood. Note here, that Chanakya refers
not just to money required for basic survival but “excellent” means
of livelihood, meaning enough money to ensure a quality life.
 

Quality life comes from ensuring that a person earns more money
than is required to meet expenses.
 
In India especially, the family is culturally an important part of an
individual’s life. We are trained to take care of our siblings, children
and parents. We are also told to contribute to society and social
causes.
 
All of that requires money. The leader has to understand this fact,
and ensure that a person can earn more than what he needs to
spend. Regular cash flow to a person, family or organization ensures
financial freedom and security. It should also be followed by good
insurance and investment plans. Saving for the rainy day is
important during the sunny days.
 
A good and steady income instills confidence in every person. To pay
good salaries is also the quality of great leadership. In many
successful companies, the employees are paid very well. Nations
that pay their scientists, teachers, thinkers, artists, policemen and
armed forces well have good quality of life.
 
Thus, for the citizens to be happy, financial planning is important for
the leader and should not be neglected.
 
   Capable of bearing taxes and fines
 
Taxes and fines are revenue for the government. The money thus
collected is used for paying salaries of government employees,
defence, education, health care, development of infrastructure and
other projects that are important for social and national growth.
 
Therefore, it is the citizen’s duty to pay taxes on time. In the
Arthashastra, Chanakya says that “The person who does not pay
taxes brings to himself the sins of the king.” It is considered a sinful
act not to pay taxes.
 

However, Chanakya has a balanced approach. He says that taxes
and fines should be imposed only to the extent of people’s capability
to pay.
 
This policy ensures a win-win situation. The government gets
revenue from the people, while the citizens are happy to pay as
much as they are capable of paying.
 
Such a society is a happy society.
 

PART C
 
LEADERSHIP IN ACTION
 
Taking Care of Citizens
 
The safety and happiness of society are the objects at which all
political institutions aim, and to which all such institutions must
be sacrificed.
 
JAMES MADISON, 4TH US PRESIDENT
 
THE POLICE PLAY a major role in taking care of a country’s citizens.
 
A good policing system ensures peace and progress in society. The
police are the tough hand of the government. They deal with
sections of society that most people do not like to face. A policeman
comes across murders, rapes and accidents daily in the course of his
work.
 
On the other hand, policemen also meet people from various walks
of life, such as politicians, businessmen, artists, celebrities and also
the common man. They have to eliminate the evil and protect the
good. This is a job with multiple dimensions. They practice
Chanakya’s principles in reality, applying the theory of Sama, Dana,
Danda and Bheda in providing protection to citizens.
 

Sama is using the method of discussion and guidance. If you ever
observe a policeman in a police station, you will find that he often
plays the role of a counselor. For instance, when two people have a
fight and land up at a police station, the police are trained to calm
them down and give valuable advice, which would solve the problem
immediately.
 
In a nation like India, where court cases can last for years, the
police offer valuable suggestions to solve the problem in a peaceful
manner, rather than taking the legal route which is time-consuming,
irritating and costly.
 
Dana means explaining the benefits. The police explain the benefits
of sorting out problems in a peaceful manner. Peaceful solutions
have many advantages over long-lasting, dirty fights that can
continue for several generations. Understanding the benefits
sometimes makes a person rethink and take a different course of
action.
 
Peace is the route which has multiple benefits. The policeman
ensures the message is given at the right time, not after the
quarreling parties have lost time and energy.
 
Danda means showing the rod or being strict. A policeperson knows
when to use the rod and has been empowered to do so. Chanakya
calls this “Danda-niti”. This is another method of controlling anti-
social elements in a society, which has been widely explained in the
Arthashastra.
 
The rod is a symbol of power and also fear. The message is that
wrongdoers cannot take things for granted. If a person crosses the
limits set by law or society, the policeman uses the rod to restore
discipline.
 
Bheda means elimination. When the good ways do not work, the
tough decision to eliminate the wrongdoer has to be taken. Showing
the rod is different from using the gun. If a gangster or terrorist is

attacking a crowd, the police have no choice but to use the power
given to them — the license to kill.
 
Police operations are required when situations get out of control. If a
limb is infected, doctors will often advise amputation in order to save
the whole body. Similarly, when no other method works, some
people who are harmful to the country have to be eliminated.
 
In taking care of citizens, Sivanandhan also proved how Chanakya’s
principles could be put into practice. Let us see how this was done.
 
   Strong position in center and frontiers
 
Sivanandhan describes his role as a leader taking care of citizens, “I
was very clear that after gaining the confidence of my own people, I
needed to connect with my citizens. Being connected to the common
man was my role.” During his tenure, wherever he was posted, he
always tried to connect with the common man.
 
Thus, he was clear that his mental positioning was strong – being
with the people and protecting them from internal (central) enemies
and external (frontiers) enemies. We see this in the police force
preparing to defend the country against any future terror attacks.
 
Sivanandhan also believed in empowering people to take care of
their own security. During his tenure, he realized that in many cases,
the common man could be trained in certain skills that are known
only to the police force, so that they can play the police role
themselves. “Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day. Teach a
man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime,” is a popular proverb.
This is how you empower people.
 
For example, the Indian Hotel and Restaurant Association (AHAR)
came to the Mumbai police with complaints of receiving threatening
calls. On Sivanandhan’s behest, representatives of the Association
were given gun licenses and technical training on how to record

phone calls. They were able to use this knowledge to nab the
wrongdoers threatening them.
 
Thus, the skill of recording calls was transferred to the concerned
people and their dependence on the police was reduced. They were
now empowered to “fish for a lifetime”.
 
   Sustainable in times of distress
 
Sivanandhan was available at the time of any distress or emergency.
And quick action ensured a feeling of confidence in people. The
capacity to handle emergencies was built through various methods.
 
He explains, “My mobile number was freely given to everyone. It
was announced in the papers and through the media. There was no
hierarchy that restricted a common man from meeting me. Anyone
could write an email to me directly. Decisions were taken quickly and
delegated to the right person to ensure fast results.”
 
Sivanandhan connected to various groups of society through various
methods. He took various initiatives to reach out to the youth,
children, women and senior citizens.
 
One way of doing this was through websites. Some of the websites
he started are: www.copconnect.in, www.hamarisuraksha.com,
www.nagpurpolice.org, 
www.thanepolice.org 
and
www.mumbaipolice.org
 
All these were interactive websites where the citizens could connect
with Sivanandhan and the police force. Thus, the communication
gap between the common man and the police was reduced.
 
   Easy to protect
 

By making the police more accessible to the common man,
Sivanandhan also ensured that the citizens were easy to protect.
 
People require constant communication and confidence building
measures. When you do that, citizens connect with you and feel you
are there to protect them. These measures look small in the
beginning, but have a huge impact.
 
The role of media in confidence building measures cannot be denied.
 
Sivanandhan says, “I would like to thank the media who helped me
take these messages to many people in a big way. The power of the
media, if it works hand in hand (with the police), can work wonders.”
 
During his career, Sivanandhan did various television interviews,
radio shows, meetings with newspaper journalists and webcasts.
Speaking sessions at Rotary and Lions clubs and at colleges and
schools were ways to reach everyone.
 
He also followed an open-door policy in office to make himself
accessible to everyone. This had a huge impact.
 
His aim was to bring about a positive change in the image of the
police. So far, the criminals would take the police for granted and the
common man kept his distance. He wanted gangsters and criminals
to fear and the common man to start trusting the police.
 
Sivanandhan explains that the police are always on the side of the
common man. They are helpers and enablers of the good. It is due
to the wrong actions of a few policemen that this image has been
tarnished. But the greatest motivation for a policeman is respect and
appreciation from the common man. Sometimes, a small positive
mention in the newspapers about police action towards protecting
the common masses will go a long way in boosting the police
morale.
 

Another initiative that Sivanandhan took was to connect with the
youth. Youth represents the energy and hope of a nation. If the
youth of our country can be given the right values and direction, we
will be a transformed nation.
 
Since film stars have a huge impact on the youth of our nation,
Sivanandhan worked closely with these stars to connect with the
youth. A short film with Shahrukh Khan to connect to the cops was
made.
 
This was also the time when the number of deaths of senior citizens
living alone in Mumbai was on the rise. To tackle the problems faced
by this vulnerable group of people, who are dependent on their
children and other support systems, Sivanandhan took the initiative
to launch a helpline number (103) for emergencies for senior
citizens, women and children. He also launched a website —
www.hamarisuraksha.com — to help the Mumbai police and NGOs
manage the safety and security of senior citizens. He got Simi
Garewal, the film actor, to inaugurate the site at the Malabar Hill
Club.
 
Post the Mumbai terror attack of 26/11, many initiatives were taken
to tighten security and be better prepared for such attacks. But
having taken these initiatives was not enough; Sivanandhan wanted
the common man to understand that the police were better prepared
now, in order to instill a sense of security in the common man. For
this, on November 26, 2009, the first anniversary of the 26/11
terrorist Mumbai attacks, he organized a parade from the Oberoi
Trident to Girgaum Chowpatty to showcase these police initiatives to
the common man. It was demonstrated to the citizens that the
police was ready with superior equipment and well-trained
policemen. “Your safety is our responsibility” was the message that
was sent to all.
 
Sivanandhan thus ensured that citizens’ protection was the topmost
priority of the police force.

 
He also started professional magazines like Protector and Samvaad,
to spread awareness. These magazines describe the internal
functioning and work of the police force.
 
Even at a personal level, Sivanandhan was very empathetic towards
citizens. To quote an example, he once paid for the rehabilitation of
a girl who was the victim of an acid attack.
 
Bhivandi children's remand home
 
The concept of corporate social responsibility (CSR) is very popular
today. But more important than CSR is personal social responsibility
or PSR. As a police leader, apart from taking decisions for the police
force, Sivanandhan also needed to show his personal commitment
towards society’s well-being.
 
Here is another case where he went beyond the role of a police cop
to help the citizens. This was the transformation of the children’s
remand home at Bhivandi. Sivanandhan felt that these children
needed a protected environment and affection. So, he sought the
involvement of consulting firm, Deloitte through their CSR initiative,
IMPACT Day. Thus, the remand home was given a makeover, with
freshly painted walls and refurbished interiors, along with upgrades
in facilities. Sivanandhan contributed money and also got involved in
making the remand home an ISO 9001 organization. Besides, he
adopted one of the inmates, a speech and hearing impaired girl, and
paid for her treatment, medical expenses and special education.
 
During Sivanandhan’s term as Commissioner of Police, the children’s
remand home in Bhivandi, in Thane district, was much transformed.
 
Sneha Joshi, who works for the remand home, said, “By chance, one
day, Sivanandhan sir visited our center. The only responsibility he
had as a policeman was to ensure police protection is given to these
children. When he started speaking to the children, he came across

Mamata who had a disability – she could not speak or listen. He was
so touched that from that day onwards, he took complete
responsibility for her treatment, education and other requirements.
He took care of her as (if she were) his own daughter.”
 
The remand center changed completely under Sivanandhan’s
leadership. He raised funds for them. The drawing and greeting
cards made by the children were put on exhibition and sale.
Medicines and other requirements were supplied. He also created a
home theater for the remand home as children could not go out
much to public places for entertainment. He organized games for
them, distributed prizes and would spend a full day with them on a
yearly basis. Yoga sessions and counseling were organized so that
once out of the remand home, these children could have a bright
future.
 
Some of these children could go on to become future die-hard
criminals. Sivanandhan deeply felt the need to make sure that the
society that had so far neglected these children, should take good
care of them once they were out.
 
A society which invests in the future of orphans and abandoned
children will definitely create a paradise on earth.
 
   Providing excellent means of livelihood
 
About his working style, Sivanandhan says, “I believed in the least
amount of paperwork and my table was always clear. In a
government organization, pending files means decision-making is
pending. The common man should never be affected by pending
paperwork.”
 
As a police leader, it was important for Sivanandhan to pay people in
time. It could be the policemen and policewomen whose salaries had
to be paid in time (so that they can earn their livelihood), or it could
be clearing some vendor’s payment. Through good administrative

skills, efficient paperwork and good decision making, he ensured
that everyone got their dues cleared on time.
 
   Capable of bearing taxes and fines
 
Taxes and fines are sources of revenue for the government. But for
people to pay their taxes, businesses have to flourish. A safe
environment has to be created for business activities to take place.
It was after Sivanandhan and his team broke the underworld’s
control over Mumbai that businessmen regained confidence in the
government.
 
Sivanandhan was instrumental in the resurgence of economic activity
in the city, thus ensuring good collection of taxes and fines for the
government.
 
   TIPS TO KEEP CITIZENS HAPPY   
 
1.   Connect with people: If they do not come to you, you
should go to them.
2.   Use the power of the media: It is a great partner for doing
good work.
3.   Show what you have done: Your customers/citizens should
know about the initiatives you have taken for their security
and happiness.
4.   Follow an open-door policy: You should be accessible to
everyone.
5.   Empower customers/citizens: Impart training on your skills.
The Leader in Me
 
 
 

Chapter 4
 
Durg
FORT/INFRASTRUCTURE
 
Swami the king
Amatya the minister
Janpada the country
Durg the fortified city
Kosha the treasury
Dand the army
Mitra the ally
 

PART A
 
THE FOURTH SECRET
 
Durg: Infrastructure
 
IN ANCIENT TIMES, the durg or fort had many uses. Forts were
located at strategic points, such as mountaintops or the coast, and
helped the king to keep a lookout for enemies. There were small and
large forts, depending on the location and the purpose for which
they were built.
 
Some forts were big, fortified cities. A complete civilization lived
inside such a durg. The high boundary walls protected the citizens
inside the fort from external threats.
 
All kinds of people stayed inside the fort, from the king and his
ministers to the citizens of the kingdom. It was like the capital of a
kingdom and those who visited this fortified city had to take special
permission to get inside. It was like getting a visa before entering a
new country.
 
The fortified city had various facilities, such as water tanks, roads,
well-built houses, stores for foodgrains, drainage systems, a
marketplace and more. Temples, places for recreation, gardens and
playgrounds were built inside the durg based on systems of Vaastu.
 
That is the reason why Chanakya has suggested the durg to be an
important pillar of a kingdom. The durg protects the citizens and
also gives them ample scope for development. Some historians

consider the study of forts very important to understand the
development of a civilization.
 
Architects of today also study them to understand the town planning
that existed in the past.
 
One of the most important lessons to be drawn from fort
infrastructure is to plan for best- and worst-case scenarios and be
well-prepared for any situation. Both human and natural factors
must be considered while planning infrastructure.
 
In Book 8, Chapter 1, Verse 2 of the Arthashastra, Chanakya says,
 
"A calamity of a constituent, of a divine or human origin, springs
from ill luck or wrong policy.”
 
During a workshop for a group of managers, the participants were
asked, “Assume there is a fire in this hotel, and in spite of the fire
protection systems, about 50 people die. Who will be held
responsible?”
 
There were two sets of answers. The first group said, “The hotel
management would be responsible, for they did not have enough
fire-protection measures. Fire-exit routes were not per norms or may
not have been updated.”
 
The second set said, “It is bad luck. Despite a strong fire-safety
policy, 50 people could not escape the fire.”
 
That is exactly what Chanakya says too. Any disaster is due to ill
luck or wrong policy.
 
Let us look at what ill luck means. In life, irrespective of how much
you plan, things can go wrong. Human beings may have done their
best and installed world-class systems. Yet, an unknown, unforeseen
factor can ruin the whole plan.

 
An example of this is satellite launches or missile testing. Years of
research and billions of rupees are spent on the development.
Thousands of scientists work round the clock to make the perfect
launch. Yet, when the missile or satellite takes off, no one is sure if it
will succeed.
 
If it succeeds, everybody is happy. But if it fails, who can be blamed?
It is called bad luck. The team tries to learn from its mistakes and
returns to the drawing board.
 
There are many instances in every person’s life where even the best
efforts can come to naught at the last moment. A sports team that
practiced the whole year may lose the final match to an easy
opponent. A doctor may lose a patient in the operation theatre, even
though he has the best experience in the world. It is bad luck.
 
However, one cannot just blame bad luck without proper planning
and efforts. One cannot go to an examination hall without
preparation. One has to work very hard and give more than 100
percent. If we study the lives of successful people, we will find that
be it an Olympic medal winner, a successful businessman or a police
officer, all of them have spent sleepless nights preparing for success.
 
If one accepts a challenge and does not prepare for it, and then
blames others for the failure, it is not a sign of good leadership. It is
wrong policy, since there was no planning or execution.
 
As leaders, we need to understand that right policies are about lots
of planning and effort.
 
One cannot wait for surprises. One has to prepare for surprises well
in advance. And for that, we need to be very vigilant and alert to
unknown possibilities.
 
Calamities or disasters are of two types: divine or of human origin.
Natural calamities like floods, earthquakes, storms and droughts are

of divine nature. Man may have less control over them, yet he can
learn from history and plan for these natural calamities.
 
Disasters of human origin include terrorism and mass murders by
leaders of nations. These can be avoided by careful planning. For
example, after the fire in the Mantralaya of Maharashtra on June 21,
2012, which demonstrated how ill-prepared the building was for
such a disaster, the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) has
started taking measures to prevent such problems in future. Surprise
inspections of various societies in the city for fire safety are being
conducted and necessary action is being taken against societies that
have violated fire-safety regulations.
 
In a city like Mumbai, earthquakes are not very common, yet the
government authorities ensure that all new constructions are
earthquake-proof, have adequate water supply and plan for the
worst situations. There are many districts in Maharashtra where
droughts are common. Planning for water becomes an important
part of disaster management in those districts.
 
Policemen tackle both human and natural disasters. In each region,
the police force and supplies are planned after considering the
history of human and natural disasters in that region. In places that
have a history of communal riots, taking measures for communal
harmony is part of planning. In areas with inadequate rainfall, water
shortage can create a law and order problem. The police plans in a
different manner for these areas.
 
Therefore, a leader is advised to plan infrastructure in such a
manner that both man-made and natural disasters are prevented.
 
What is a durg in the business world?
 
Businessmen also require good infrastructure to run their businesses
successfully. The definition of the durg changes according to the
nature of the business. The head office of a business, from where
the CEO or chairman operates, can be called its control tower.

 
If the business is in the manufacturing segment, the factory,
including the plant, machinery and other equipment, becomes part
of the infrastructure. A carefully constructed factory that takes safety
and hygiene into account and complies with international
benchmarks puts the company on a global platform.
 
Expand the concept of the durg in the case of a modern nation.
Good roads, flyovers, bridges, houses are all important for nation
building. In the eleventh five-year plan of India, 9% of the gross
domestic product (GDP) has been allocated to infrastructure
development. The twelfth five-year plan also includes infrastructure
development as a major component of the national budget.
 
In the case of the police, infrastructure includes the police stations,
weapons, vehicles and more. In the case study of this chapter, you
will read more about how changes in infrastructure created a
productive and positive work atmosphere for the police force.
 
In today’s world, infrastructure is not just physical, but also digital.
Apart from having good offices, digital infrastructure which includes
computers, the internet and mobile phones is equally important. This
is more so because of the growing trend of working from home and
telecommuting. And infrastructure all over — in airports, coffee
shops, hotels, restaurants, even inside buses — is enabling this
trend. Therefore, when you invest in digital infrastructure, you
should ensure that it is supportive of telecommuting for those
employees who may require it.
 
As a leader, it is important to ensure world-class infrastructure for
your organization. Move with the times and get the best that is
available. Remember that technology is a very important enabler in
today’s digitally connected world and invest in the best that is
available to meet your needs.
 
If you do not build your durg well, your team will be demotivated.
Gone are the days when people stuck to an organization for a

lifetime. The opportunities are vast and the choices are many. So,
creating good working conditions is essential for any organization
that wants to retain employees.
 
I know of people who have left companies because of bad toilets.
Similarly, having good chairs, proper ventilation, aesthetically
pleasing decor, good lighting and canteen facilities are necessary.
Even security measures like CCTVs and fire exits are important for
leaders who want to build great organizations.
 
In the police, Sivanandhan worked on “transforming” the workplace.
Some of the experiments that he conducted in the workplace have
become benchmarks for other police officers.
 
Sivanandhan believes that leadership is also about setting a trend, a
standard that others will love to duplicate. Today, when he looks
back at his career and when young IPS officers come to him for
guidance and discussions, he is happy to see that the next
generation wants to make things better and take the benchmark
forward.
 

PART B
 
ACCORDING TO CHANAKYA
 
Qualities of Good Infrastructure
 
TO BUILD GOOD infrastructure, you first need to create the blueprint
or master plan. If you get this right, building the infrastructure
becomes easy. In many cases, you may have a good plan, but as
you keep working on the details and people give you inputs, the plan
keeps evolving and changing. The more you plan in detail in the
initial stages, the better it will be towards the end.
 
When Sivanandhan started building the infrastructure of his
department, he considered everything his force may want, such as
good housing, schooling or health facilities. When you consider
different perspectives in creating your blueprint, more people benefit
from the infrastructure that you build. Infrastructure has to be “built
to last.”
 
As a leader, when you have to build a good office, there could be
two situations.
 
The first could be that you need to build the infrastructure from
scratch. This is called a green field project.
 
A green field project is relatively easy because it is like starting on a
plain canvas. You can draw any picture you want. There are
unlimited choices; the only limitations are your imagination and the
budget. For instance, if a person has been given a piece of land to

construct housing facilities for the police force, the look of the final
structure will be based on innovation and creativity.
 
It can be built like an existing police quarters; it can be designed like
the better-looking police quarters in another country; it can even be
a totally unique structure that sets a standard in building police
quarters.
 
The second situation is when you have to renovate an existing
infrastructure. This is called a brown field project, where you have to
take up an existing, functional infrastructure, and create a new
project in the same place with minimal disruptions to the existing
infrastructure.
 
The challenges are very different in this case. Let us take the
example of 50-year-old police quarters, where people are staying
and have facilities such as schools, markets and hospitals. This
structure needs to be pulled down and rebuilt, because the planning
of five decades ago is insufficient for present needs, the foundations
of buildings have weakened and buildings themselves are
dilapidated.
 
The project leader has to plan the infrastructure considering present
needs. He also has to consider factors such as alternative
accommodation for the residents when the buildings are pulled
down; 
the 
schooling 
of 
their 
children 
at 
the 
alternative
accommodation; rules and regulations in creating the new
infrastructure; 
convincing 
residents 
about 
the 
necessity 
of
redevelopment and handling any resistance towards paying higher
maintenance charges, when the residents move into the new
buildings.
 
That is why, in a city like Mumbai, slum redevelopment is taking
more time than was originally planned. The leader has to listen to
the opinions of the people while building the plan. At times,

redevelopment will have to be done in phases, without disrupting
the existing system.
 
Think like a designer and architect while creating new infrastructure.
Ask these questions:
 
   What kind of look do I want?
   What will people feel about it?
   Have I considered the inputs of others?
   Am I thinking long term while building it?
   How will I manage the budget?
   Will people resist the change?
   What approvals are required?
   How soon can I make it?
Think on paper. Write down the problems and their alternative
solutions. Then, think through various possibilities to tackle each
problem. Take suggestions from others; think out of the box; think
laterally. By thus applying your mind, you will be able to develop the
best infrastructure.
 
In this chapter, you will also read the story of building the Thane
Police School — an infrastructure that never existed, but has now
inspired many other senior police officers.
 
But, before we do that, let us take Chanakya’s inputs on building
infrastructure.
 
In Book 6, Chapter 1, Verse 8 of the Arthashastra, he says that the
durg should have the following qualities:
 
   Aesthetically pleasing
   Beneficial to men
At the same time, people, who are also part of the infrastructure of
an organization or country, should have the following qualities:
 
   Dedication to work
   Loyalty and honesty

These are eternal qualities of good infrastructure. Chanakya has
listed many more qualities, but we will discuss these four aspects for
our purpose. The first two qualities pertain to “hard infrastructure”,
meaning what people can see and feel. The remaining two pertain to
“soft infrastructure”, that is, people’s attitude while working in an
organization.
 
The leader takes the first two qualities into consideration while
creating the physical infrastructure. But the next two qualities have
to be developed by the people themselves. Of course, the leader
plays a major role in inspiring his people to develop these qualities.
As we have seen in previous chapters, an inspired leader can create
an inspiring work culture.
 
   Aesthetically pleasing
 
Any infrastructure you build must be pleasing and peaceful. It should
look beautiful and impart a sense of well-being to visitors as well as
those who work there. Recall how you feel in a five-star hotel — the
well-designed, well-maintained surroundings and courteous staff
make you feel welcome and cared for. That is the aim of good
infrastructure.
 
Besides being beautiful, the infrastructure must also be functional.
Visitors should not feel lost or unwelcome. The staff should be polite
and should help the visitor achieve the purpose of his or her visit.
This was one of Sivanandhan’s achievements when he was in charge
of immigration (1987–91). As mentioned earlier, he succeeded in
transforming the office into a positive workplace with a corporate
feel and an attitude of seriousness towards solving the problems of
citizens and visitors. With that, he achieved one of the greatest
breakthroughs in the police department.
 
Spend on making the infrastructure look good. Select the right
colors, use good material and classy designs. Today, with mass
manufacturing, you can get good quality at economical prices. Do

some reading and research, visit websites, ask designers and check
the varieties available in the market.
 
The result of your efforts will be infrastructure that is good to look
at, and makes both your workers and visitors happy.
 
   Beneficial to men
 
In building infrastructure, the needs of the people who will use it
should be considered. If you involve these people and understand
their problems, the infrastructure can be built to offer solutions to
those problems.
 
For example, the report of an employee survey at a multinational
software company showed low energy and high levels of fatigue in
employees. It was revealed that to boost their energy levels and
reduce fatigue, employees would like to eat food at short intervals
during the day.
 
However, the canteen was far away from the work areas. People
waited for lunch breaks, because of the distance and time taken to
travel to the canteen. This had affected employee productivity to a
large extent.
 
Once the company understood this problem, new infrastructure was
created to solve it. Refrigerators and food shelves were bought and
loaded with energy drinks and nutritious food. These were placed all
over the office such that no employee had to walk more than 20
steps to reach a food point. Employees could have unlimited food
during the day, free of cost.
 
The result of this initiative was increased energy levels, productivity
and efficiency of the employees.
 
Here is another example. When Sivanandhan was a Commissioner of
Police at Thane, he would often observe cops having tea at a

roadside stall. He decided to build a restaurant in the area, where
the policepersons could chat with their colleagues and have light
snacks as well. That is how Urjita Restaurant & Lunch Home came
into being.
 
This is as important for a policeman as it is for a software engineer.
After all, policemen too work and think hard through the day. And
unlike software engineers who have desk jobs, policemen face harsh
physical conditions and high levels of air and noise pollution in the
course of their work.
 
Thus, a leader should ensure the workplace is inspiring to him as
well as to his subordinates and employees. Since people today spend
most of their time in their workplaces, the workplace infrastructure
should make them feel at home.
 
   Dedication to work
 
Building good physical infrastructure is the first step. The next step
is to employ people who are dedicated to work.
 
People who are corrupt, greedy or selfish will make use of the
workplace infrastructure for their personal interests. You find this in
various powerful offices, where even though the employees are
public servants, they make the public serve them.
 
The people who work in your organization should be value based.
This again begins with the leader who is devoted to the
organization’s cause. If he uses his power of office for the right
reasons, his subordinates will not be able to misuse their power.
 
If a good man is put into a bad system, he may get corrupted
himself. But, if the leader is incorruptible, even a corrupt man in the
system will not be able to function. That is the importance of an
ethical leader.
 

Moreover, people in the organization should be able to connect to
the leader’s vision and dream.
 
For example, a company was functioning in a small space for over
20 years. Finally, after years of hard work, the leader was able to
achieve his dream of constructing a new and bigger office.
 
When it was inaugurated, the peon remarked, “For the last 20 years,
it was my dream too, to have a new office for our company.”
 
This is a man devoted to his work. The peon did not dream of a
large salary. He had grown with the organization and had begun to
associate with the leader’s dream. The peon became more interested
in the company’s success than in personal success. If a leader can
achieve this — to make his dream the dream of his subordinates —
he has proved his leadership qualities.
 
Every person in that organization then gets inspired to work for a
higher purpose. Devotion is a state of mind where you dedicate your
work to a larger goal, to the welfare of the organization and the
society at large.
 
   Loyalty and honesty
 
Despite the fact that they are being paid good salaries and perks,
employees in organizations sometimes engage in petty behavior,
such as stealing mouse pads or office equipment. This becomes
difficult to change.
 
To earn the loyalty of an organization’s employees is an important
part of the role a good leader plays in the company. People who
keep changing jobs every now and then find it difficult to convince
recruiting companies of their competence or loyalty.
 
The benefits of loyalty can only be seen in the long run. If you work
hard and with sincerity, the rewards will come.

 
Honesty of intent and purpose should be developed in the people.
This core value can be easily developed in various corporations and
also in the police force, the army or paramilitary force, if the leader,
the commissioner of police or the commander of the army himself is
a role model.
 
Such loyalty can be easily built when the leader stands with his team
like a friend, philosopher and guide during crises.
 
Thus, creating a good infrastructure around and inside people builds
great organizations.
 

PART C
 
LEADERSHIP IN ACTION
 
Building Good Infrastructure
 
As a nation, a society, a family and an individual, we must be be
grateful to our great ancestors who dedicated their lives to
laying the infrastructure of our livelihood today. Let us continue
their path and build upon it.
 
MASTER JIN KWON
 
IN THIS CASE study, you will find out more about the initiatives
taken by Sivanandhan to build good infrastructure in his various
postings.
 
Sivanandhan was made the Commissioner of Police of Mumbai in
June 2009, soon after the terror attacks on Mumbai on November
26, 2008.
 
This was the time when the world was looking at Mumbai and India
after the terror attack. There was widespread public outrage within
the country over the way the terror attack had been handled.
National security and the competence of the police had come under
scrutiny, both nationally and internationally. The common man had
already lost confidence in the government. Various groups came out
openly on the streets of Mumbai and across the nation to raise their

voice against the system. As a result of this, the Chief Minister and
the Home Minister of Maharashtra had to resign.
 
In the final stages of Sivanandhan’s career, there was a task to
complete. With limited time in hand, upset and dissatisfied citizens
and a government clueless on action steps, all eyes were on him as
he took over.
 
A media person asked him about his priorities. He was clear, “Only
one agenda: tackle terrorism.”
 
As a leader, one is responsible for everything. But one needs to
understand the current situation and focus on the key problem. This
does not mean you ignore the other problems. You are aware of all
problems; yet your focus must be on the “key” problem.
 
It is the 80–20 theory: 80% of your energies should be spent on the
key issue, while the remaining 20% can be spent on other issues.
For Sivanandhan, 80% of his energies were to be focused on
tackling terrorism, while 20% would be on problems such as
housing, promotions and salaries for the police force. Leadership is
about balancing between multitasking and focus.
 
During the 1990s, when he broke the underworld nexus, the
scenario was different. He could not duplicate what he had done in
the past. After 20 years, terrorism had become a global problem
with global operations. Yet, there were some similarities between
tackling the underworld domination of the 1990s and the aftermath
of the terror attacks of 2008. Sivanandhan had to build the
confidence of the public, get government approvals as fast as
possible, and most important, build the morale of the police force.
 
When the problem starts with a nation like Pakistan, it does not have
an easy solution. Ever since 1947, both nations have fought wars (in
1947, 1965, 1971 and 1999) and also tried to find peaceful solutions.
 

They have tried to solve their problems through diplomatic meetings
of heads of both nations at various times; even economic solutions
have been worked out. Cultural programs, exchange programs of
artists and musicians and friendly cricket tournaments have been
organized in both nations. Various confidence building measures
have been taken. Yet, there does not seem to be a permanent
solution to this cancerous disease.
 
At the same time, organizations including the police, army, navy, air
force, Border Security Force and Indian Coast Guard cannot take the
peace route. They have to be prepared for the worst, a war
situation.
 
26/11 taught the Mumbai police a valuable lesson. Even though they
were supposed to take care of law and order within a geographical
region with limited resources, they had to be ready for a low-cost
“war”.
 
Usually, this role is played by the army and other agencies that have
adequate resources and training. From day one, they have been
trained to kill the enemy on the border, while the police force is
trained to tackle criminals, manage traffic, take care of senior
citizens and investigate robberies and murders. All this is very
different from being trained to handle a national war.
 
But, as a leader, Sivanandhan decided not to sit back and blame the
government saying, “This was not my job,” or “Without enough
bullet-proof jackets and arms and ammunition, how do you expect
us to fight a war which is usually fought by the army?”
 
Instead, he decided that the time for change had come.
 
The Maharashtra police would now evolve into a national force as
strong as the army; it would become the benchmark in policing. He
made his plans very clear to the government. What was never done
in the past, needed to be done today to tackle the problems of the
future.

 
He had to change the image of the police, give it a complete
makeover.
 
The following measures were taken for the first time in the history of
the Maharashtra police:
 
    126 crore was sanctioned by the government based on
various proposals sent.
   Several speed boats were bought. The police began working
closely with the Indian Coast Guard, as the terrorists had
come through the sea route.
   1,500 MP3 and MP4 guns and ammunition were purchased.
   40 Marksman bullet-proof jeeps and several small combat
vehicles were purchased.
   Five simulators were purchased, so that policemen would be
able to practice firing in urban and rural settings. The RD
Pradhan Committee report had pointed out that the police
force did not have sufficient ammunition for firing practice.
The procurement of simulators eased this constraint.
   Various new institutions came into being, such as Force 1, in
line with the NSG commandos, and the Quick Response
Team (QRT) consisting of 1,500 policemen. World-class
training sessions were organized for policemen. For
instance, the QRT was trained by top commandos.
The next step was to make the common man aware of the measures
taken, so that he could feel safe.
 
For this, apart from creating a force that was equipped for a war-like
situation, Sivanandhan constantly communicated with the citizens of
the country about the steps the police force had taken.
 
These were the measures taken for communication:
 
   Utilizing the media: The media helped to convey the
message about the measures taken, not only locally or
nationally, but also internationally.

   Participating in lecture tours: Sivanandhan personally
addressed various clubs, community gatherings, schools
and colleges, asking people not to be afraid. The professor
in him was coming alive. The key message given was, “We
are responsible for your safety.”
   Organizing seminars: He invited some of the key strategy
experts to share their inputs on national security. These
included APJ Abdul Kalam, MK Narayanan, Julio Rebeiro,
Ajay Sahney, Anil Kakodkar, R Mashelkar, Shyamal Datta, MJ
Akbar, Sundeep Waslekar and KPS Gill. Sivanandhan’s
objective was to encourage the police force to interact with
global experts and gain exposure to new ideas and feel
encouraged and optimistic, rather than retreating into a
shell after the demoralizing experience of 26/11.
   Organizing a memorial parade: On the first anniversary of
26/11, in 2009, the parade was taken from the Oberoi
Trident hotel to Girgaum Chowpatty. The aim of the parade
was to showcase the new equipment purchased and the
training given. This was almost like a Republic Day parade,
where the strength of a nation is showcased.
   Imparting information in police stations: Posters regarding
the new equipment, training and security measures were
created and put up in police stations, as a confidence-
building measure for the police force.
Even though the post of DGP was the final post in Sivanandhan’s
career, where most of his energies and resources were used to build
world-class police infrastructure, building such lasting infrastructure
was always part of Sivanandhan’s style of leadership. Leaders should
understand that infrastructure is beyond just beautiful interiors. It is
a message you send to others that we are determined to be world-
class. We are serious about our business. And most important, we
care about you.
 
Here is a look at some of the infrastructure Sivanandhan built
through his career. You will see that the qualities of good
infrastructure described by Chanakya can be seen in reality here.

 
   Aesthetically pleasing
 
Gymnasiums: Even in the police force, Sivanandhan prioritized the
health of his people. He created 25 world-class gymnasiums with the
best available equipment in the police stations. After the
infrastructure of the gymnasiums was improved, more and more
policemen and policewomen began using them.
 
Sivanandhan created gymnasiums that were aesthetically pleasing
and housed world-class equipment. Everyone felt a sense of pride
when they used these gymnasiums.
 
   Beneficial to men
 
Besides building world-class hospitals and training centers,
Sivanandhan also brought about significant improvements to
infrastructure in police stations. All of this infrastructure is beneficial
to the police force.
 
Hospitals: Hospitals are not just places where you find doctors and
nurses. It is a place of hope for everyone. When one comes to a
hospital, there are mixed feelings of fear and hope. A good, clean
hospital with caring doctors goes a long way in reassuring patients
and their families and making them feel more confident about
recovery. The icing on the cake is when the hospital expenses are
also taken care of. Sivanandhan worked on a system for building
hospitals and health care centers.
 

His priority was to build a state-of-the-art hospital that would
provide facilities at economical rates to policepersons, as the existing
hospital was old and dilapidated. Sivanandhan undertook to build a
massive sports stadium at the cost 
 2.5 crore, in which he
accommodated an ATM of the State Bank of India, a provisions store
for police families and a hospital with seven air-conditioned rooms
for super-specialty doctors from Wockhardt hospital, with whom a
10-year MoU has been signed. Many corporate houses have donated
a variety of expensive equipment, including a dental chair, a color
Doppler machine, instruments for the Opthalmology department and
a fully-equipped ambulance.
 
Thanks to Sivanandhan’s vision, 7,000 policemen and their families,
who were hitherto neglected in the government-owned civil hospital,
could accrue immediate benefits.
 
Sivanandhan was also instrumental in creating a health reference
manual for the police force. Forty thousand copies were printed and
distributed to each person in the force. Health checkups of all men
were done regularly and health problems were tackled on a case-to-
case basis.
 
Yoga classes, sports events and tips on diet and nutrition were also
created and organized with the help of experts. The aim was to
improve the health of the police force.
 
Thus, Sivanandhan ensured that the health of his force was taken
care of.
 
Creating hospitals, gyms and nursing homes is creating hard
infrastructure. But, creating an environment of health and safety is
soft infrastructure.
 
Police station improvements: The police station is like a charging
point for the police force. Like a mobile phone which needs to be
charged at an electric point from time to time, the police station is
the place where the cops come to work hard, but also to rejuvenate

and refresh between bouts of hectic activity. As mentioned earlier,
unlike a corporate job which could be limited to the four walls of the
office, the policeman is continuously on the move. The police station
is where he comes for a short break amidst his long and tiring day.
 
Sivanandhan worked hard to make the police station a place where
cops could get re-energized. With the increasing number of
policewomen in the force, providing special facilities to women and
building women-friendly infrastructure was important. Toilets,
restrooms and places to have food and chat with colleagues were
created.
 
The cops were eating and drinking at roadside shanties. Therefore, a
police café was built inside the CP office. The policemen’s wives
were trained by Padmashri Prema Purav; these ladies ran the police
café and enjoyed the profits. The entire capital expenditure for the
café was borne by the Maharashtra Chamber of Housing Industry
(MCHI).
 
The need for a restaurant in the police quarters was expressed. So,
a restaurant called Urjita was built and given on rent to a local
restaurateur. This yielded monthly profits towards the Police Welfare
Fund.
 
Even the administration side of the police station was upgraded with
good computers, user-friendly technology and specific software
designed for police-related work. With the help of the National
Association of Software and Services Companies (NASSCOM), a
state-of-the-art cyber-crime lab was created in the CP office at the
cost of  75 lakh. So far, 2,600 policemen from all over the state
have been trained in cyber-crime detection and investigation.
Management Information Systems (MIS) were also upgraded for
faster and more efficient performance.
 
Training Centers: The growth of any institution depends on the
quality of training it imparts to its people. The policemen also need

training on a regular basis. The entry-level training imparted during
induction gets outdated with time.
 
To make the police force efficient and effective, it is important to
upgrade technical knowledge, and develop hard and soft skills.
 
For this, Sivanandhan created training centers across the state. A
huge state-of-the-art training center was created in the cinema
theater complex on Ghodbunder Road with the gift of a huge room
from the Thane Municipal Corporation (TMC). It was appropriately
furnished and called Manthan, meaning churning (of the minds).
Many useful training programs were, and continue to be, held here
successfully. Another world-class auditorium with training facilities,
called Prerna, was created at the Mumbai Police Gymkhana.
 
The Maharashtra Intelligence Academy in Pune is another up-to-date
training center with good infrastructure, to help hone intelligence-
gathering skills.
 
   Dedication to work
 
Thane Police School: Among the entire infrastructure he created
during his police career, one building is very close to Sivanandhan’s
heart. It is a building he is proud to have created. This building
stands strong for policemen and will benefit generations to come. It
is the Thane Police School. He was already instrumental in building
two police schools at Gadchiroli and Chandrapur while he was
Deputy Inspector General of Police, Nagpur range.
 
How does one guarantee that an employee remains devoted to his
work? It is not by paying large sums of money or by enforcing a law.
It comes from the employee’s feeling that someone is taking care of
him, that someone is concerned about the matters that he is
concerned about.
 

By building the Thane school, Sivanandhan sent a message to the
policemen that their children’s education was also a priority.
Sivanandhan felt strongly that the vicious cycle of police constables’
children in turn becoming police constables ensured that future
generations remained confined within the 10/10 room and mired in
poverty. His dream was to see them becoming doctors, engineers
and IAS/IPS officers. When this feeling comes naturally to every
policeperson’s mind, people feel devoted to their work.
 
The story of the reconstruction of this almost-defunct school is one
of hope and vision, of transformation, of looking for the solution
within the problem.
 
This was in 2005, when Sivanandhan was the Commissioner of
Police (CP) of Thane. He was in his office doing routine work, when
a lady came to visit him. She was a school teacher of the police
school in Thane and wanted to resign.
 
She explained that she was disillusioned by the dismal working
conditions in the school. She was the only teacher and the school
had no facilities to speak of. Therefore, no new students were
enrolling in the school.
 
The teacher in Sivanandhan took up this challenge. He immediately
decided to visit the school, which was across the road outside the
CP’s office, along with the teacher.
 
The school which was built in 1920 had one teacher, 80 children,
one room, no toilets, no fans, no lights. They deserved something
better.
 
What he saw was not a problem but a solution. The land on which
the school stood was huge and owned by the police department.
Sivanandhan envisioned converting the out-of-use school to a world-
class facility.
 

The land was owned by the police; that was a good starting point.
He knew there was a golden opportunity here to create a future for
the next generation of policemen. But to get gold from the mine,
hard work and a proper process is required. He did not lose time,
but began planning and setting things in motion.
 
He made a few phone calls and checked the legal provisions. He did
his financial calculations and considered which people were likely to
support the cause. Within a few days, the vision was crystal clear in
his mind. It was possible.
 
He got the clearances and government approvals, the school
affiliations as well as like-minded people to support the cause. The
work began on March 1, 2005 and by June 15, the school began
functioning. On December 19, 2005, a Shiamak Davar dance
program yielded  3.5 crores from the public. By August 15, 2006,
the 40,000 sq.ft. school stood ready in its full glory. It was
inaugurated by then Home Minister Sri RR Patil, in the presence of
the guardian minister Sri Ganesh Naik and all other public
representatives. At last, the policemen owned their own school! The
school was ready with all the facilities in just a few months.
 
When the school was started, it was bigger than before and had
many more facilities. Therefore, it was decided that 50% of the
seats in the school would be reserved for the children of policemen
at subsidized fees. Now, about 3,000 children study in the school.
The police children pay only 25% of the fees. No donations are
taken from anybody. For the last four years, the school boasts of
100% results with first class and distinction in the Standard X
examinations.
 
Due to the growing demand of admissions, now a few more floors
have been added to the school. There is a rush for admissions and
even non-police children seek admission there with an ever-
increasing waiting list.
 

The school has flourished with time and is now among the most
sought-after schools in Thane. The school’s students have excelled in
academics and sports; and parents see a bright future for their
children. Please visit www.thanepoliceschool.com – a website
created by Sivanandhan to know more.
 
Sivanandhan’s moment of great happiness was when he got a call
from a subordinate. “Sir, the policemen and their wives are upset
that they are not getting admissions for their children in our school.
The 50% seats that are allocated for the children of policemen are
not enough to meet the demand. Their request is – stop giving seats
to outside children. We want 100% seats for the children of
policemen!”
 
Sivanandhan smiled. He recalled the day when a school teacher had
walked in to his office, determined to resign. And he felt elated on
receiving a call from a policeman demanding more seats to admit
more children. His dream had become a reality.
 
   Loyalty and Honesty
 
Libraries: Books are a great source of information, knowledge and
wisdom. Books can be found in most police stations, but most of
these are technical and related to the job, such as police manuals,
the Indian Penal Code, the Indian Constitution and various legal and
other reference books.
 
However, to grow mentally and intellectually, the policeperson needs
to read other good books on self-development, management, fiction
and even biographies of inspiring men and women.
 
For this purpose, Sivanandhan created various libraries for
policepersons wherever he served. About 10,000 inspiring books
were purchased and policepersons were encouraged to read and
start thinking of fresh ideas.
 

Sivanandhan himself is a voracious reader, and the same trait can be
seen in both his daughters. A challenge his wife used to face during
transfers was which books to take along and which to leave behind.
Their houses were loaded with books and he gave away books very
generously, encouraging others to read and grow.
 
He created the same atmosphere in the police department through
the various libraries. In his opinion, a policeman would become wiser
by reading various books, than just tackling problems that come to
him when he wears the uniform.
 
Sivanandhan’s plan to create a reading culture is very strategic in
nature. Once a person starts reading about the lives and experiences
of great people, their thoughts automatically become a part of
yours. Thus, values such as loyalty and honesty gradually become a
part of the reader’s thinking and mindset.
 
You too can transform any scenario if you have the vision and a
higher cause to fulfill. No problem is a problem till you see it
yourself. Then you work on the solutions. And without realizing it,
you start doing the impossible. You become the change and create
the change.
 
So far in this book, we have seen the implementation of various
projects. But no project, however strong the vision behind it, can be
completed without financial support.
 
How a leader tackles this challenge is something we will see in the
next chapter, which, according to Chanakya, is the next secret of
leadership — Kosha (Finance or treasury).
 
   TIPS TO BUILD GOOD INFRASTRUCTURE   
 
1.   Build world-class facilities: Do not compromise. Take up the
challenge.

2.   Focus on hard and soft infrastructure: Create an
environment which is classy.
3.   Take others’ help: With inputs from others, you can make it
better and faster.
4.   Your vision should continue: If you have seen the benefit of
creating something, make it for others as well.
5.   Create landmark projects: In the problem itself lies the
solution.
The Leader in Me
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 5
 
Kosha
TREASURY/FINANCE
 
Swami the king
Amatya the minister
Janpada the country
Durg the fortified city
Kosha the treasury
Dand the army
Mitra the ally
 

PART A
 
THE FIFTH SECRET
 
Kosha: Finance
 
KOSHA IS THE treasury that keeps the kingdom going. Chanakya
has said that the first task of the king is to focus on the acquisition,
growth and expansion of the treasury.
 
The treasury or finance maintains the kingdom and helps in its
growth and expansion.
 
Chanakya has suggested in the Arthashastra that a king should have
a sound understanding of economics; it is among the first subjects a
king should learn. In the daily timetable of a king, the first activity
should be checking the accounts of the kingdom.
 
The koshadhyaksha, or the finance head, must bring in daily reports
and inform the king about the kingdom’s financial situation. The king
cannot lose focus on the finances.
 
Artha is wealth and shastra is scripture. Therefore, the Arthashastra
itself means the scripture of wealth. Scholars have called it a book of
economics that covers microeconomics and macroeconomics,
accounting systems, auditing rules, collection of taxes and fines and
utilization of public funds for the development of a kingdom.
 
It is a misconception that India and Indians do not understand much
about money, economics and the practical ways of life. It is often
believed that since Indians are spiritual, they think more about life

after death, heaven, moksha, etc., than about wealth and material
possessions.
 
However, India and Indians understand money and wealth like no
other culture does. We know its practical value and also its
limitations.
 
Why do you think we were the most prosperous nation and a target
for invaders from all over the world? For thousands of years, we
were the wealthiest nation and had even evolved a theory of
economics which the Western world has not even understood.
 
The Arthashastra is proof of this. It is a book on wealth and its
management. It is about knowledge of wealth and it is a wealth of
knowledge. A study of the Arthashastra helps us to understand our
past in all its glory. Principles of wealth described in the Arthashastra
can be directly applied to modern- day situations.
 
Whether in the past or in the present, finance is the backbone of any
undertaking. Every individual, family, society, organization and nation
is dependent on money and finances. A strong and well-managed
treasury is the heart of any organization.
 
The treasury is the basis on which the government creates national
and state budgets. Budget-making is a highly specialized activity,
which incorporates opinions from experts and guidelines on
economic policy given by the Reserve Bank of India.
 
Good economic policies create employment and a conducive
environment for the growth of trade, business and entrepreneurship.
 
Thus, good control and management of the treasury leads to the
prosperity of the king, the citizens and the kingdom.
 
Once, a mother, who was very upset about her son not being able to
make a good life, came to an ashram. She said to the head monk,
“Guruji, my son was not good at studies; he could not get a good

job to earn a livelihood. So, no one is ready to marry him. Since he
is a failure in worldly matters, I think he is fit to be a monk. I want
him to join your ashram.”
 
The head monk replied, “Lady, being a monk does not mean
escaping from the realities of the world. It is meant for those who
are successful in worldly matters and want to go beyond. A person
who cannot prove himself in the world outside, cannot be a winner
in the world inside.”
 
Thus, to be successful in this world, one has to work hard to prove
oneself and earn money. Before one can renounce wealth and
power, one has to earn it.
 
A very thin person was once watching a wrestling match. At the end
of the match, the winner challenged the audience, “Is there anyone
who wants to wrestle with me?”
 
This thin man excitedly accepted the challenge. However, when he
reached the wrestling ring, he realized his blunder. His opponent was
huge and well-built. The very first blow would have been enough to
throw the thin man out of the ring.
 
The audience was laughing and waiting for this man to be smashed
to pieces. To save his skin, the thin man came up with an idea. Just
as the match was about to begin, he said to his opponent, “Please
go away. I forgive you; I will not fight with you,” and he ran away.
 
Many of us are like this thin man. The challenge excites us, but the
reality is difficult to face. One very important reality of life is to earn
money. Therefore, those who are unable to earn money find such
justifications as, “I do not require money,” “Money is evil,” or “All rich
people are thieves.” This is a case of sour grapes.
 
A leader understands the importance of money. A responsible person
will never underestimate the value of money.
 

Another important dimension of money is to be “money-conscious”
and not “money-minded”. A money-conscious person understands
the importance of money and gives the right place and value to it.
 
A money-minded person, however, views the world from a financial
perspective. The outlook of such people is ROI (return on
investment) in every project. Their attitude is, “What is in it for me?”
 
Money-minded people look for direct or indirect financial benefits
even in the social-work projects they undertake. Everything starts
and ends with money for them. They draw their powers from their
bank balances and value an individual based on his financial
standing. The world for them becomes a deal-making platform.
 
For money-conscious people, money is a resource. It is a means to
an end, not the end itself. They respect money. They work on
finances, but understand that the vision of any project is more
important than the finance itself.
 
These people are industrious; they are risk takers; they work for the
benefit of society. They are the leaders and the role models who
create positive change.
 
The Arthashastra details a financial model called the Four Stages
of Wealth. This model can be applied to an individual as well as an
organization.
 
The four stages of wealth are:
 
1.   Wealth Identification
2.   Wealth Creation
3.   Wealth Management
4.   Wealth Distribution
These are four stages in the journey to understand wealth in all its
dimensions. This is the essence of all finance courses.
 
Let us discuss each stage of wealth.

 
1. Wealth Identification
 
Identification of wealth is the starting point
 
To understand this better, suppose you want to dig a well. You will
need to follow a scientific and logical process to understand the
location of water levels underground, the land conditions, the depth
at which water can be found and so on. When you dig a well armed
with this knowledge, you are sure to find water.
 
Similarly, if you want to be wealthy, you need to research and find
out areas of creating wealth. You can take the help of experts for
this. Following the right direction and path is important to get to
your destination faster.
 
Businessmen are always on the lookout for potential expansion
opportunities. Financial investors work on identifying new sectors
and industries that could provide good returns on investment.
Salesmen try to identify new markets for their products and services.
All these are examples of wealth identification.
 
Students often ask their teachers for guidance on courses to apply
for, in order to build a career. In this case too, the student is trying
to identify a long-term career opportunity.
 
Thus, identification is the first step. But simply identifying where the
wealth is does not guarantee the wealth is yours.
 
After identifying the location of the water bed, the next step is to
start digging the well.
 
2. Wealth Creation
 
Creating wealth is hard work. It is a laborious task that requires
patience and a long-term perspective.

 
When you start digging the well, you work into an unknown future.
Many times, there is self- doubt about whether you are working in
the right direction and whether you will succeed. You may also be
subjected to the scrutiny and ridicule of others. This is where self-
motivation is important.
 
The famous saying, “Winners never quit, and quitters never win” is
useful here. Once you have carefully thought through your options
and identified the wealth you are seeking, you need to work hard in
that direction. It will be a long and tedious journey. But in spite of
the hurdles, your hard work will pay off and you will succeed.
 
When we study about the lives of successful people, we appreciate
the success, but sometimes forget the hard work they have put in to
reach where they are.
 
A media person once asked a successful person, “Sir, you became a
success overnight. How did you do it?” Came the reply, “Yes, I
became a success overnight. But the night was very long.”
 
Everyone wants to be wealthy. But creating wealth is the difficult
part. If you want to be wealthy, remember, “There is no shortcut to
success.”
 
Once you strike gold, once you have created wealth, the whole
world changes. You have tasted success; you have arrived.
 
3. Wealth Management
 
The end of one problem is the beginning of another. Once you have
overcome the challenge of creating wealth, the new challenge is
what to do with the money.
 
Initially, you were chasing money; now, money chases you. The tide
has turned.

 
Success is relative — it brings many new relatives. People want to
associate with you. You are surrounded by new friends. The world
recognizes your success and wants to identify with you. Bankers and
financial experts want to manage your wealth and offer you various
investment options.
 
You should enjoy the money and success you have earned after
years of hard work. But after the party is over, it is time for some
serious thinking.
 
The challenge is to manage your wealth such that you can sustain it.
You need not worry about basic survival issues now; you need to
focus on maintaining your wealth.
 
This is where you need wealth management. With proper planning
and good advice, you can start taking the right steps for a brighter
future.
 
Managing the wealth you have created is as important as creating
the wealth. If, like other wealthy people, you spend all your wealth
as quickly as you earn it, you will very soon be back to square one.
Instead, you need to save, invest and manage your wealth.
 
4. Wealth Distribution
 
Chanakya says, distribute the wealth you have created. Give it back
to the underprivileged. Support a needy person, a start-up
entrepreneur, a social cause, an artist, the education of a child, the
health of an impoverished person.
 
This is easier said than done. Once you have enjoyed the power and
glory that money gives you, it is not easy to let go. Without your
realizing it, need becomes greed.
 

However, after leading a good and successful life, take up a new
challenge to help people achieve what you have achieved.
 
True social service is not about helping others; it is helping yourself
to evolve spiritually by letting go of your possessions. Share the
secret of your success with others. Their success should become
your success.
 
However, remember the story of the thin person who said to the
wrestler, “I forgive you!” You cannot distribute wealth before you
have identified, created and managed it.
 
Once you have gone through the three prior stages, when you
distribute your wealth, it will be out of inner fulfillment and not
regret.
 
In India, we give wealth a divine status by calling it Goddess
Lakshmi and worshipping it. We are the only country in the world,
which has given money a spiritual form. We consider it a blessing.
 
With the money you have created, fulfill your corporate social
responsibility (CSR) and personal social responsibility (PSR). Only
then would you have fulfilled your spiritual responsibility (SR).
 
As far as finance is concerned, Chanakya has brilliant advice to give
us. In Book 2, Chapter 8, Verses 1–2 of the Arthashastra, he says,
 
"All undertakings are dependent first on the treasury. Therefore, he
(the leader) should look to the treasury first.”
 
Any project or assignment is dependent on finance. Great ideas
cannot become reality if the required finance is not available.
 
“All undertakings” is very important. Be it a national project like
building roads and bridges, or a small event at home like a birthday

party or a television to be purchased, they are dependent on the
treasury, that is, finance.
 
Chanakya then advises the leader, “Therefore, he should look into
the treasury first.”
 
The leader has to look at what is available in the treasury. For
example, before you go shopping, you need to consider your bank
balance and accordingly decide how much money can be spent.
 
The credit card system has changed this thinking drastically. We
tend to look at the product first, and not the treasury, assuming that
we can pay for the product later. According to Chanakya, we need to
look at the treasury before finalizing the product and its purchase.
 
In an organization, the subordinates often have various plans and
wishes, such as organizing a party or moving to a new office. While
the subordinates’ enthusiasm is important, the leader has to do his
calculations and look at the finances.
 
However, if you find that you do not have the finances for a project
suggested by your subordinate and beneficial to the organization, do
not refuse outright. A response such as “It is not possible because
we do not have the money for it,” or “We have never undertaken
such a big project,” would demotivate employees and discourage
them from sharing their ideas with you. As a leader, you should
inspire innovation and creativity in your organization, not discourage
it.
 
Therefore, if the project seems worthwhile, think about how to raise
money for it. This is where leadership is important: making the
impossible possible.
 
As Robert Kiosaki, the well-known expert and author on wealth,
money and investment advises, “Think about possibilities of how to
create that money which is required but you do not have.”
 

The first step in raising or creating the money is to do your
calculations and create a budget. This is a very important step, as
you will see from the following anecdote.
 
Once, a wealthy person observed a creative, young boy working on
a new engineering model. The person went up to the boy and said,
“I am ready to help you financially. Let me know how much money is
required.” For the young boy, this was a dream come true.
 
However, he was not trained to think financially and could not
estimate how much money he would need. He was surprised that
someone had offered to finance his project so readily, but shocked
that he himself had no idea how much it would cost.
 
He asked the wealthy man for a day’s time. After doing his
calculations, he submitted a project report the next day. Within a
few minutes, he received a check for the full amount.
 
Creativity and imagination without budgeting is building castles in
the air. Getting the finances right is a step towards making your
dream castle a reality.
 
Here is an anecdote about the importance of budgeting and finance,
especially for budding entrepreneurs.
 
A businessman was going through tough times. New orders were
not coming in; existing orders were not getting executed. He was
not able to pay his vendors, which affected the raw material supply.
His clients were not paying on time because of quality issues in the
products delivered. Employees were quitting the company due to
non-payment of salaries.
 
The tough financial situation affected his domestic life too and he
found it difficult to make both ends meet.
 
Despite all his efforts, the crisis did not seem to end. In sheer
frustration, he thought of the final solution to all his problems:

ending his life.
 
So, one morning, he left for office as usual, bidding goodbye to his
family. But instead of going to the office, he went to the seashore. It
was tough to end his life, but it also seemed like the only solution.
 
He wrote a suicide note, stating that nobody but himself was to
blame for the act. And now, he was ready to walk into the water
which would take him away from his worldly responsibilities forever.
 
As he took the first step, he saw an old man standing in front of
him, smiling mischievously.
 
He wondered whether the person was one of his many creditors and
why he was smiling. The old man came closer, and with a twinkle in
his eye, asked, “Suicide?”
 
The businessman thought, “I am in no mood to listen to your
philosophy of life. I don’t want you to tell me life is precious and all
that. I have tried everything and this is the only way out.”
 
As he prepared to say this to the old man, the old man piped in,
“Let’s come straight to the point. You are in a financial mess and
cannot see a way out. Right?”
 
The man was surprised. “Who is this man? He hit the nail on the
head,” was his immediate thought.
 
But again, before he could say anything, the old man said, “I have a
solution to offer.”
 
“Oh my God, he’s probably an insurance agent or financial advisor.
Get lost, man! I have no time or mental energy to listen to your
expert advice,” thought the man angrily. “Why can’t people let you
commit suicide in peace? God, this is not fair at all!”
 
“How much money do you require?”

 
“What?” The man was finally able to get a word out. “But sir, I do
not know you.”
 
“That doesn’t matter,” said the old man. “I am a businessman too
and like to come straight to the point. Can we talk?”
 
They sat on the seashore and after a long time, the businessman
was able to think, rather than worry. He had met a man who could
contribute.
 
The businessman was all ears as the old man began, “Money is
never the cause of evil or good. It is neutral. If it goes into the
hands of bad people, it becomes dirty money and can cause
destruction. In the hands of good people, it is used for good causes
and becomes divine.
 
“Understanding money makes us wise. If there is a financial
problem, it is important to face it. It is important to be practical and
look for a solution,” he continued.
 
“A person running a house, organization or nation needs to obtain
and manage finances carefully. If he does not get the foundations
right, it can create a disaster, and even lead to the thought of
suicide,” he continued with his mischievous smile.
 
He paused to let the businessman think this over and asked again,
“How much money do you need?”
 
“Sir, I do not understand,” the businessman said in a mellow voice.
 
“Have you calculated how much money you need to pay your
vendors, suppliers, employees and other bills at home?”
 
“Not really, sir. But I have given up hope.”
 

“That is not the point. Did you do your calculations?” the old man
asked sternly. “In such a mental state, it may not be possible for you
to do this alone. So, let us do it together. Here is a pen and paper;
start writing.”
 
Surrendering to his new-found mentor’s wishes, the businessman
listed his debts and reached a figure of  2 crore.
 
The old man said, “Good, we have completed the first step. When
life gives us complex problems, write them down and think on paper.
Then, look for practical solutions.
 
“Now, the next step is to think about sources of money,” the old man
continued.
 
The businessman said, “Sir, I have tried everything — more credit
time from vendors, bank loans for working capital, everything. But, it
is all over now.”
 
“What if I give you the money?”
 
The businessman could not believe his ears. Why would this old man
help an unknown person, without any guarantee of getting his
money back?
 
But the old man continued, “I will give you the money you require,
without any expectation in return, no interest or guarantees, no
bonds to be signed.” The businessman was dumbfounded.
 
The old man introduced himself as Pravin Chheda, the chairman of
Gurudev Steel Industries. “In my long career of over 50 years, I
have built an empire. I have also seen many businessmen losing
their confidence and committing suicide because of lack of financial
support during tough times,” he explained.
 
He continued, “Fortunately, in the days when I was struggling, other
rich businessmen helped me. Today, I do the same thing to thank

those who helped me.
 
“But there is one difference. I also help unknown people. Many of
my friends tell me not to trust unknown people with money. But I
have always taken risks — sometimes calculated, at other times,
based on gut feel.”
 
The old man gave an insight into how a wealthy man should think,
“At times, your risk does not pay off. You lose money. But I look at
the big picture. Even if one out of the ten people I helped succeeds,
my work is done.”
 
He added that he had an annual budget to help businessmen who
were in financial trouble. “I call it the confidence building budget
(CBD),” he said.
 
Though the businessman was skeptical about the offer, Mr Chheda
offered to give him a check of  2.5 crore right there. “The extra
money is to meet unexpected expenses. Take it. And do not worry
about returning it. Focus on your business revival and progress.”
 
“But Sir, this is too big an amount for me not to return,” said the
businessman hesitantly.
 
“And too small an amount for me to save a life and rebuild a
business,” Mr. Chheda replied. He wished the businessman good luck
and said, “We will meet here after six months to review the
situation.”
 
After months of despair and frustration, the businessman’s luck had
finally turned. With the money in his hands, he felt confident of
reviving his sagging fortunes.
 
Instead of going to office, he decided to go home and spend the rest
of the day with his family. His family too could sense that he was
calm and relaxed, not the agitated and frustrated person he had
been for such a long time.

 
The next morning, he decided to deposit the check. As he was going
to the bank, he thought, “When things get better, I would like to
repay this money. I will consider this as a debt and give it back many
times over.”
 
Then, he thought that it would be a grand gesture if he did not use
this money at all, but returned the check after six months, along
with a second check from his earnings. That would justify the faith
the old man had reposed in him.
 
However, he desperately needed money to pay his debts. He said to
himself, “I have stretched myself to this extent. Let me test my limits
some more. If things get worse, I can deposit this check any time.”
 
He thought of an action plan to see if he could revive his business
without using the check.
 
First, instead of running away from the situation, he called all his
employees and gave them a reality update. “We are going through a
rough patch, and I know your salaries have been delayed. But, I
have a request — can you support me for just one more month?
 
“We will give it our best shot. Please continue to work a little harder
and I promise you things will get better. All of us have worked
together for many years and our business has goodwill built over
many years. Let’s try to rebuild the business.
 
I promise you I will pay your pending salaries, along with interest
and bonus.
 
“You also have the option to take your pending salary and quit now.”
He had to just deposit the check. “I leave the decision to you,” he
concluded.
 
As he looked straight into their eyes, the employees sensed the
seriousness of his intent and his honesty. They agreed to stay on for

another month.
 
The commitment from your team boosts your morale. At times, the
leader instills confidence in the team. And many times, the team
makes leaders feel more confident of achieving their goals.
 
Next, he called his oldest vendor, “Sir, I know I owe you a lot of
money. But if you can immediately supply just one more lot of raw
material, I can start processing my pending orders. I promise, as
soon as I receive the first check from my customers, I will start
releasing money to you.”
 
The vendor was surprised, because until then, the businessman had
been avoiding his calls regarding the outstanding payment. Now, the
businessman had himself asked for support and assured payment.
Considering their long business relationship, the vendor decided to
release the raw material.
 
The businessman’s third action was to call the customer who had
rejected several orders and not released payments because of
quality issues. The businessman apologized for the quality issues
and for defaulting on orders.
 
He continued confidently. “Sir, you were the first company to give
me an order many years ago, and I have grown because of you. I
request you to support me one more time.” The businessman
confided about cash-flow issues on his end and requested the
customer to release some money as an on-account payment. “It will
help me start the manufacturing process once again and supply the
pending orders per your quality standards.”
 
The customer sensed the businessman’s sincerity and decided to
help him. He called the accountant and asked him to release a check
for  20 lakh.
 
Within a few minutes, the businessman had the key ingredients in
place. He immediately started work and his team — employees,

salespersons, quality control persons — worked day and night with
him to rebuild the company.
 
Within one month, the situation was very different. When the first lot
of finished goods reached the customer, he was more than satisfied
and was happy to release some more money. The businessman took
the help of experts to analyze the old, rejected goods and fix the
quality issues. The goods were then sent back to the customer in
accordance with the expected quality standards.
 
The customer was delighted. New orders started coming in. Word
spread in the market. New customers started approaching the
businessman directly. The sales team started working closely with
the production department. And they turned the tide.
 
Every morning, the businessman used to look at the check he had
got from the old man. He was happy it was not deposited.
 
With time, the business grew from strength to strength. The
businessman was able to pay his employees in full, with interest and
bonuses as promised. He was now looking at setting up another
manufacturing unit and hiring more people.
 
Six months after his first meeting with Mr Chheda, the businessman
returned to the same seashore for their promised meeting. He had
brought the original check with him and an additional check to thank
Mr Chheda for his support.
 
When Mr Chheda arrived, the businessman touched his feet. “Sir,
thank you so much for all the help. I am glad you saved my life and
my business.” He handed over the original check of  2.5 crore and
the additional check of  25 lakh to thank him.
 
But Mr Chheda said, “Keep the second check. Use this money to help
someone who has financial problems, the way you faced problems
six months ago. And when you give it away, do not expect any
returns.”

 
The businessman agreed to do so. However, he had been struggling
with a question for a while now and decided to ask the old man.
 
“Sir, I did not have money when I met you six months ago. And I
never used your money. As far as money is concerned, my situation
was the same. So, what changed for me to revive my business?”
 
Mr Chheda had seen many such turnarounds in his life. So, it was
easy for him to point out, “Money is a tool. The person using the
money is more important than the money itself. But, a good
estimation of finances gives you the right starting point.
 
“In your case, what you lacked was confidence. And money was
required to build that confidence. I gave you the money and you
bounced back. I am glad you rebuilt your business with that
confidence, rather than the money I gave you.”
 
Mr Chheda continued, “This is called call-money in business. Call-
money is commonly used in community businesses or rural areas.
You see, when a young businessman starts a new venture, he
requires support.”
 
He was now letting the businessman into a secret that many
professional MBAs did not know. “The biggest support is when a
group of people back the idea. This is the greatest confidence
builder. In most cases, a person may not give you the money to start
with, but when someone says, ‘I am with you,’ that itself is a
wonderful starting point.”
 
He explained further, “Say a project requires  1 crore. Five people
would verbally commit  20 lakh each to the entrepreneur. This is
call-money. That commitment itself is enough to set the
entrepreneur on track.
 
“The entrepreneur will still raise the money through a bank loan or
other sources. But, if other sources fail him, he knows he can always

fall back on any of these five businessmen.
 
“In most cases, the entrepreneur is able to get some support, in
cash or kind, such as office space, a supply of raw materials, or even
a first order. Thus, the young entrepreneur starts off. In most cases,
the call-money is not used at all.”
 
Then, he came to the crux of the matter, “Call-money is never real
money. It is a state of mind.” Smiling, he continued, “But then, what
is really required in life is the confidence of money, not necessarily
the money itself.”
 
This story is very important for young entrepreneurs. If you have a
good idea, go to senior businessmen and explain the concept. Their
blessings are enough. In India, this has been a practice for many
generations.
 
Call-money is also called “financial closure” in modern businesses.
Once a project plan and cost estimations are ready, it is announced
to various people, some of whom would commit finances to the
project. Once the finances are closed, it is easy to start up with full
speed.
 

PART B
 
ACCORDING TO CHANAKYA
 
Qualities of a Good Treasury
 
IN BOOK 6, Chapter 1, Verse 10 of the Arthashastra, Chanakya says,
the kosha should have the following qualities:
 
   Acquired lawfully by ancestors and oneself
   Able to withstand calamity
   Can be sustained even when there is no income for long time
The Arthashastra was written nearly 2,400 years ago. There have
been many changes since then in financial models, institutions and
transaction methods. Financial institutions like banks have come up.
From coinage, we have moved to currency notes, check books and
plastic cards. The internet helps us in e-banking and mobile banking.
 
Yet, the principles of money and wealth do not change with time.
They are eternal, constant, time-tested laws.
 
There is a reason why many ancient scriptures like the Arthashastra,
Ramayana, Mahabharata and Thirukkural are still read and referred
to by a globalized and tech-savvy generation. The laws and
principles described in these scriptures are universally applicable
even today.
 
With that knowledge, let us take a closer look at Chanakya’s
description of the kosha.
 

   Acquired lawfully by ancestors and oneself
 
This is the first principle of money. It must be acquired lawfully.
 
Wealth that is acquired by unlawful and unethical means does not
last long. Even if it stays with you, you lose your peace of mind. To
enjoy wealth, it has to be acquired by lawful and ethical means. It is
not wrong to make big money, as long as it is through the right
means. This also means paying due taxes and not cheating others.
 
Growing rich and making a quick buck is the in-thing today. Many
people do not pay attention to the methods used to acquire wealth.
But remember, there are no shortcuts to success. Ramdeo Agarwal,
a financial wizard, says in the film Chanakya Speaks, “Wealth that
takes longer to create stays for a longer period.”
 
Thus, wealth that comes quickly goes away quickly. But the wealth
that is earned through hard work is real wealth. Wealth could also
be acquired by your ancestors and you may be fortunate enough to
inherit it. Some people are destined to be born in wealthy families
owing to the merits of their past lives.
 
However, inheriting wealth does not mean squandering it.
Chanakya’s advice is to expand the inherited wealth, not reduce it.
What you have is the gift of your ancestors; if you grow it further,
your ancestors will be happy. Children have the responsibility to
grow the wealth that was given by their parents.
 
If you inherited a company worth  100 crore, try to increase its
worth to  500 crore, rather than reducing it to  50 crore. Kumar
Mangalam Birla was only 26 years old when he inherited the
company from his father, who met with an untimely death. The
valuation of the Aditya Birla group today is many times what it was
during his father’s time. Is there any doubt that such a son is a role
model to children born in business families?
 

Make a lot of money, but through the right means. Be slow but sure.
You may fail in your first few attempts, but do not get disheartened.
Keep trying; do not be afraid of making mistakes. Chanakya says,
“After a hundred trials, you will succeed.”
 
   Able to withstand calamity
 
Financial ups and downs are a part of life, irrespective of whether a
person is rich or poor. For the poor, financial problems are related to
the basic necessities of survival; for the rich, problems are related to
maintaining and growing their wealth.
 
Therefore, it is important to plan your finances such that you can
withstand calamities. A futuristic viewpoint, rather than immediate
gratification, is required for that. You need to “sustain” your wealth
for the future.
 
The age-old Indian concept of “savings” is applicable here. India was
able to hold its own during the global recession not just due to
government’s measures or economists’ advice, but because of
individuals’ propensity to save.
 
The Indian culture believes in saving. As an agricultural country
dependent on the monsoon, we have always saved our farm
produce to sustain us for the rest of the year. With economic
development, savings took the form of money or gold.
 
There is a difference between savings and investments. Savings is
the first step while investment is the next level. Save for the rainy
day, and invest for growth.
 
The difference between savings and investment is very subtle, yet
profound. A poor man cannot invest for growth. He needs to save
for the next meal. Only money that is left over after taking care of
basic needs can be invested.
 

Investment is a science in itself. It requires a different bent of mind
to be a successful investor. Successful investors are thinkers who
take calculated risks. Investment should never be an impulsive
decision. It should be carefully thought through. Your hard-earned
money should be invested in the right place, at the right time and
also on the right person.
 
Insurance is one more concept to understand here. You may not
have money enough to invest, but you should insure yourself. A poor
man cannot afford to invest, but he should insure himself and his
family. Life insurance and medical insurance are safety nets that help
to take care of you and your family in times of calamity.
 
Governments across the globe are working on insurance for their
people. Companies insure their employees. A person should insure
his family, wealth and property. The amount spent on insurance is
minimal compared to the benefits that will follow in case there is a
calamity.
 
Save – Insure – Invest. These are the three steps that will help you
to withstand any crisis.
 
   Can be sustained even when there is no income for long
time
 
In life, you may face long periods of misfortune.
 
For example, a poor, uneducated woman suddenly loses her
husband and has no social support to speak of. She has to work
hard, take care of the household and educate her children.
 
She knows her capacity to earn is limited because she is not very
educated. So, her only hope of improving her family’s lot is to
educate her children and improve their career prospects.
 

This is a long-term approach to finance. If she takes a short-term
approach and asks her children to take up employment right away,
their future would be compromised.
 
Financial wisdom is working hard even if there is no income in the
short term. In the long run, the hard work will pay off and good
times will return.
 
Some businesses are seasonal in nature, yet salaries to employees
must be paid every month. For example, during the Diwali season,
sales of fireworks, dresses and cars increase manifold. Some
companies prepare for their Diwali season sales almost six months in
advance.
 
In these six months, while they are manufacturing the goods, they
have to bear the costs of manufacturing, including salaries to
employees, with little or no income. The owner of such a company
cannot withhold payments until he is able to sell the goods and earn
money. Finally, during the sale season, cash inflow far exceeds cash
outflow.
 
Such a long-term approach requires patience and financial wisdom.
 
It is often said that “A businessman should plan 10 years ahead, a
politician one generation ahead, and a teacher a century ahead.”
 

PART C
 
LEADERSHIP IN ACTION
 
Financial Management is the Key to Success
 
Wealth is the product of man’s capacity to think.
 
AYN RAND IN ATLAS SHRUGGED
 
Money can be raised through various means. In this case study, you
will see how Sivanandhan’s financial management of the various
projects he undertook is a shining example of the qualities of a good
treasury described by Chanakya.
 
   Acquired lawfully by ancestors and oneself
 
Sivanandhan ensured that money spent on projects was always
collected through legal sources. In the case of the police
department, there were two major legal sources — government
grants and budgets, and social support, that is, fundraisers or
corporate social responsibility (CSR) activities of various companies.
Sivanandhan made ample use of both sources.
 
The challenge, however, was to make sure that there was a win- win
situation for both the giver and the taker.
 
CSR initiatives included setting up of schools, hospitals, restaurants,
training centers, gymnasiums and stadiums.

 
Additionally, a cyber-crime cell was instituted and anti-terrorism
seminars were organized.
 
Some projects were landmarks by themselves. The police training
center at Thane named Manthan, was constructed in a hall given to
the Thane police by the Thane Municipal Corporation (TMC), in
exchange for the assistance rendered by the police in handling a law
and order situation that arose from the TMC’s waste management
projects. Manthan has a seating capacity of more than 200 with
state-of-the-art training facilities. The center cost nearly  3 crore.
Another example was the training center, Prerna, constructed at
South Mumbai with the support of various well-wishers.
 
He not only organized funds for what he felt was needed, but took
regular feedback from his people, asking them for suggestions for
improvement. A traffic policeman once suggested installing an
oxygen booth for policemen, who manage traffic on congested roads
amid high levels of air pollution.
 
In the next 10 days, Sivanandhan organized funds, convincing Essel
World to sponsor the oxygen booth that cost  65,000.
 
The state-of-the-art hospital at Thane was constructed at a cost of 
1.5 crore. The dental machines at the hospital were sponsored by a
corporate house. Sivanandhan negotiated with the Wockhardt group
of hospitals to run it for the police. The hospital’s facilities are
provided free of cost for the 6,000 police families of the Thane
Police.
 
Considering 
his 
noble 
intentions, 
various 
individuals 
and
organizations also came forward to help Sivanandhan financially.
Yoga classes and Art of Living workshops were conducted for the
police free of cost by the respective organizations.
 
   Able to withstand calamity

 
When he was the CP of Thane City (2005–2008), he opened a cyber-
crime cell and cyber-crime laboratory in his office in Thane.  17 lakh
were spent by NASSCOM to create this cell, which was later also
created for the Mumbai police.
 
It was important to understand future crime trends and make plans
to withstand these calamities. Sivanandhan’s plan to create a cyber-
crime cell is an answer to withstand future calamities that may arise
through cyber crimes.
 
   Can be sustained even when there is no income for a long
time
 
During his interaction with his subordinates, Sivanandhan evolved
some incentive schemes for his force. However, he realized that if a
policeman is given an additional  2,000, he may spend it on buying
a mobile phone or bike, or on liquor and other unproductive
activities. Therefore, providing good education to policemen’s
children was a better option.
 
He also realized that policemen who wanted to admit their children
to reputed schools often had to pay  50,000 to  1 lakh as donation,
which many of them could not afford.
 
He came to the conclusion that if the policemen were to be liberated
from this vicious cycle of poverty, education was the only means.
Therefore, instead of extra salary increments, it was better to create
a world-class educational institution. This was also the inspiration
behind the Thane Police School.
 
Sivanandhan had a long-term perspective. He realized that the
problem of poverty would not be solved by merely giving money to
the policemen. The idea was to eliminate poverty itself. Building an
educational institution was a long-term solution to ensure long-term
income.

 
In designing the Thane Police School, Sivanandhan decided to
provide all the amenities and facilities from the beginning itself,
rather than building the school piecemeal, grade by grade. Time was
of the essence; he wanted the school to be fully operational before
he was posted elsewhere.
 
To fulfill this grand vision, Sivanandhan arranged a fundraiser
program by Shiamak Davar in December 2005. Though he had spent
about 10 months in Thane, he received overwhelming support from
the public. The fundraiser was a runaway success, earning about 
3.5 crore. The profit of  3.5 crore was used to build the school.
 
Visit www.thanepoliceschool.com to see the making of the school.
The school is run by the Goenka Educational Trust. It is one of the
finest schools in the area with state-of-the-art infrastructure and
does not accept any donations for admission of students.
 
While Sivanandhan raised funds and helped build several facilities
during his tenure at Thane, he also wanted to ensure that these
facilities would be maintained well by his successors. That would
require finance in the long term. Therefore, a Police Welfare Fund
was created for this purpose. The operations of Urjita Restaurant —
which had been built in the Thane headquarters to provide
policemen with better-quality food served in a hygienic place with
good ambience — were rented out to a private operator at around 
1 lakh per month. This rent became part of the Police Welfare Fund.
Nearly  12 lakh for the Fund was received each year from rent
alone.
 
The creation of the Welfare Fund allowed Sivanandhan’s successors
to maintain the Thane Police School, the stadium he built and
various other structures. Therefore, long-term planning of finances
helped to build and maintain infrastructure.
 
As we have seen, money is only a tool, a means to an end.
Sivanandhan collected it through various sources and used it to

create the best possible facilities for the police force.
 
Also, in terms of finances, it is important to inspire your team and
give them credit.
 
Let us end this chapter with an incident about sharing your money
and success with your team. We will go into more detail on this in
the next chapter.
 
Sivanandhan was once invited by the Lions Club, which had
nominated him for a police bravery award. Instead of receiving the
award himself, Sivanandhan gave it to a hawaldar, Sanjay Manchekar
who Sivanandhan felt had shown exemplary bravery in a case, who
he felt truly deserved it.
 
Hawaldar Manchekar was posted to provide protection to the owners
of a hotel in Mulund. A group of four gangsters came to shoot at the
owners of the hotel. Manchekar jumped into action. The gangsters
fired at Manchekar and ran away in an auto. Manchekar himself
chased the gangsters in another auto and in four rounds of firing,
ultimately succeeded in nabbing them, risking his own life in the
process.
 
Sivanandhan felt that due recognition for such a hawaldar’s action
was more important. Manchekar was honored in a grand public
function organized by the Lions Club on April 25, 1999, during the
police bravery awards and he was presented a check of  5,000
along with a citation. It was a proud occasion for him and his family.
Sanjay Manchekar, growing nostalgic over the event said, “It was a
highly memorable moment for me. It boosted my morale and my
pride in being a part of the police force.”
 
Sivanandhan also spoke to the Commissioner of Police (CP) and got
him a reward of  25,000 which was a very big amount in those
days. Manchekar also got the DG’s insignia.
 

The most important aspect is that Hawaldar Sanjay Manchekar was
not a part of Sivanandhan’s team.
 
Yet, Sivanandhan felt the strong need to give this recognition and
appreciation. In a police force of lakhs of hawaldars, getting this
recognition was a momentous achievement for Manchekar.
 
This is one of the examples of Sivanandhan’s way of motivating his
people.
 
   TIPS FOR FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT   
 
1.   Consider multiple sources: You should be able to raise
finance from various sources.
2.   Goodwill is important: Along with goodwill, your personal
integrity is important.
3.   Work for others: Invest in projects that will be financially
beneficial to everyone.
4.   Think long term: Financial planning should encompass both
creation and maintenance.
5.   Share your wealth: Share it with others in your team who
would otherwise never get the credit for the team’s
achievements.
The Leader in Me
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 6
 
Dand
ARMY/TEAM
 
Swami the king
Amatya the minister
Janpada the country
Durg the fortified city
Kosha the treasury
Dand the army
Mitra the ally
 

PART A
 
THE SIXTH SECRET
 
Dand: The Team
 
THE SIXTH PILLAR of a kingdom is the army. It showcases the
power of a country and protects the citizens from external threats.
Besides fighting outsiders, the army is also utilized during
emergencies such as floods or to solve internal crises, as in the case
of civil wars. Apart from the armed forces on the borders, the police
force is the internal army of a country.
 
An army is a trained group of people that is ready to fight any
threat. Appropriate selection and training are very important to build
a strong army, as is the commitment and dedication of the soldiers.
 
“Army”, in this book, will be interpreted as “team”.
 
One man alone cannot fight a battle. It is always a team that wins a
war. For example, while Satyajit Ray won an Oscar for his lifelong
commitment to the art of filmmaking, the fact remains that an entire
team comprising cameramen, financiers, technicians, artists and spot
boys supported his endeavors. Thus, his team is as important as
Satyajit Ray himself.
 
Similarly, in a cricket team, one player may score a century, hit a six
on the last ball, win the game and be crowned the Man of the
Match. Yet, the team’s victory is due to the performance of all its
players — the fielders, bowlers and other batsmen have all done
their bit to win the match.

 
While one person may get credit for extraordinary performance; yet,
it is finally teamwork that makes any person a winner.
 
In an organization, the chairman of the company is at the helm, and
guides and gives direction to others. Yet, the entire team of
managers, workers, vendors, office boys and drivers, work together
for the growth and success of the company, to help the company
achieve its objectives.
 
As the captain of the team, the leader is always given credit for the
team’s achievements. Yet, the leader should never forget to share
the credit with team members. That is real leadership — to share
your success with others.
 
In a team, different people have different mindsets. In fact, the
strength of a team lies in its differences, rather than its similarities.
When team members are able to think about issues from different
angles and perspectives, then there is real debate and progress.
 
For example, a team is working towards a product launch and the
group leader asks the team members for their opinions. Each
member will have a different perspective about the product launch
— one may consider the budget; another may think the timing of
the launch was important; a third would focus on market segments;
while a fourth may draw attention to the importance of attractive
packaging. All of these viewpoints only help to make the product
launch a success.
 
If all the team members think differently, what is common in the
team? What keeps the team together? It is the purpose that keeps
the team together. A cricket team’s purpose is to win the match; a
business team’s objective is to offer its goods and services for a
profit; a police force’s purpose is to maintain law and order.
 
Thus, if different members of any team focus on the core purpose,
in spite of their differences, they will stick together to achieve the

goal for which they came together.
 
Teamwork begins with the leader. The leader should understand the
importance of teamwork and instill the value of good teamwork in
his team.
 
The famous army saying says, “The safety, honor and welfare of
your country come first, always and every time. The honor, welfare
and comfort of the men you command come next. Your own ease,
comfort and safety come last, always and every time.”
 
This statement summarizes the purpose of the army most aptly. The
army works together for the country first. The next priority is the
team members, who should be ready to sacrifice themselves for
each other’s welfare. Only after that can each individual think of his
safety or comfort.
 
In a team, each member has different strengths and weaknesses. A
leader should be able to understand the strengths and weaknesses
of each team member, and allocate work to them accordingly.
 
If someone in the team has not completed the work as required, the
leader has to question himself, “Did I delegate the work to the right
person? Could someone else have done this better? Who else in my
team is capable of doing this properly?”
 
A good leader is someone who gets work done from people who
may not even think they were capable of doing it. Thus, the leader
should have the subtle vision to understand a person better than the
person understands himself.
 
After allocating work, the leader must continuously supervise the
team. A leader can delegate work, but not his responsibility. If the
team fails in its tasks, the leader has to shoulder the responsibility.
 
The captain of a sinking ship always leaves last, only after each
person on the ship has been rescued.

 
Therefore, in the Arthashastra, Chanakya emphasizes that a leader
has to be fully alert and regularly keep track of the work his people
are doing.
 
For this, the leader should ask his subordinates to file status reports
regularly. Today, these reports are titled Management Information
Systems (MIS) and can be filed annually, monthly, weekly or even
daily.
 
In the police department, one of the daily routines of the leader is to
study these reports. The leader must supervise every detail of the
team, from the attendance of each team member to the work he is
doing. If the leader loses track, then it becomes difficult to plan and
make strategies for meeting team objectives.
 
How does one create a good team or army of dedicated people?
 
The first step is selecting the right person, who has the requisite
qualities and qualifications for that particular job. A farmer has to
select the best seeds before he sows them. Therefore, the first step
is to ensure the person who will join your team is the right person
for the job. Testing the right person in the selection process itself is
the key to success.
 
The next step is to train the person. The person should be a
trainable person, that is, he should be open to change.
 
The selected person may have the capability, yet he is new to the
job. You cannot expect productivity from him on day one. You have
to train and give him enough opportunities to learn on the job.
 
In Book 1, Chapter 5, Verse 6 of the Arthashastra, Chanakya
describes how to conduct training:
 

“Training and discipline are acquired by accepting the authority of
the teachers in the respective fields.”
 
   Training
 
Creating a good team requires training. It is for this purpose that
organizations have induction programs and the police force imparts
entry-level training to new recruits.
 
People often find their training days to be among the best in their
lives, because of the new skills they learn, and because these are
carefree days with few responsibilities.
 
   Discipline
 
The trainee must focus on the purpose of the training and not take it
casually.
 
During the training, the trainee may not have any work-related
responsibilities, but he should remember that he is preparing for
many future responsibilities. Therefore, the trainee should be
disciplined from the start.
 
There are two kinds of discipline — external and internal. External
discipline is imposed by the teachers and other senior authorities.
Trainees often have to follow a code of conduct and are penalized if
they break the rules.
 
This external discipline should lead to internal discipline or self-
discipline. The trainee should not require the presence of senior
authorities or the threat of penalties to demonstrate disciplined
behavior.
 
The training and discipline should be with the trainee forever.
 

Discipline helps build character. It is an aura you carry with you,
wherever you go. In the police force too, discipline is very important.
Being punctual, dressing well, obeying seniors and not keeping any
decisions pending are important aspects of being disciplined.
 
A disciplined person is respected everywhere, because he embodies
certain values and principles and lives his life by them.
 
   Accepting the authority of teachers
 
Discipline can be difficult or easy to achieve.
 
Chanakya explains that it is easily achieved by accepting the
authority of the teachers. That is, trainees must completely accept
the teacher or trainer, and trust his maturity and experience.
 
There should not be any element of doubt about the teacher’s
knowledge when you are getting trained. If there is a conflict such
as “Is my teacher saying the right thing?” or “I don’t think this
trainer or officer knows the subject well,” then there is a problem.
 
The trainee’s attitude should be like a child learning from the mother.
Whatever the mother says, the child accepts as the ultimate truth.
There is no iota of doubt. This type of connection between the
trainee and the trainer leads to rapid learning.
 
If the trainee begins questioning the trainer’s ability at the first stage
itself, there is no progress. Questions should be asked after the
trainee has achieved a degree of maturity and experience. Only then
will the trainer’s answers also be understood well.
 
This quality of tuning to the teacher is called Shraddha in Sanskrit.
This word does not have an English equivalent. It is not belief or
surrender; neither is it blind faith. It is a beautiful inner connection
between the teacher and the student.
 

It is an inner transformation in the student when he “tunes” himself
to the mental wavelength of the teacher. It is like a radio getting
tuned to the right radio station. Then there are no more
disturbances, the music is clear and one can listen to it for long
hours.
 
During the training, it is important for the trainee to get totally tuned
to the teacher and accept him as the authority in the field.
 
Students often blame teachers for not being able to teach well.
There may be some element of truth in that, but students should
also question if they were the right students.
 
One day, a child came home very angry and upset and told his
mother, “Our geography teacher is very boring; she does not teach
properly. All my friends in school also hate her.”
 
The mother advised, “My child, there will be many more teachers in
your life. Some may be able to communicate well; others may not be
able to do so. Every teacher has a different method of teaching. Just
because you did not like the method or style of teaching does not
mean she is a bad teacher. From today onwards, you have to be a
good student of geography.”
 
The child was given a completely new perspective on how he should
think in the classroom. From the next day, he was so tuned to the
teacher that he topped the class in the exams.
 
   Respective fields
 
Teachers, whether in school or college, teach different subjects, that
is, they are experts in their “respective fields”. There are teachers
and then there are specialist teachers. For example, a teacher of
Sanskrit will teach the basics of the language, while a teacher of
Sanskrit grammar will go deeper into the subject.
 

In today’s generation of super-specialization, it is especially
important for students to listen to and accept each teacher.
 
Sivanandhan was a professor of economics in his pre-police days. He
enjoyed teaching and this passion continued for life. It continues in
this book form to reach out to many who do not know him.
 
Even in his Indian Police Service (IPS) training days, experts in
various fields came to teach the new recruits. Later, when
Sivanandhan became a leader himself, he continued training the
force with the help of world-class teachers.
 
In this chapter, you will read about the various training initiatives
taken by Sivanandhan to build a strong team.
 
There were days when one used to study to get a job. Nowadays,
people study to maintain their jobs. Continuous training is essential
in today’s times.
 
One has to read textbooks in school and college to pass exams, but
the habit of reading good books and acquiring knowledge all through
life should be developed. You should be an ever-ready student and
learn from every person who comes into your life.
 
Teamwork can be easily achieved if the leader is focused on training
and development. Today, various organizations like the police have
their own training centers. These are educational institutions which
share knowledge with the team to perform better.
 
As the definition of TEAM goes, Together Each one Achieves More.
 
One person alone may not be strong, but ten weak people coming
together is strength. Synergy is seen in good teamwork. Synergy is
the concept of one plus one adding up to greater than two. When
two ideas come together, the result is better than if the ideas were
executed in isolation.
 

In teamwork, there is happiness instead of frustration, collaboration
rather than competition, and acceptance instead of denial. The
leader puts all of the individual team members together and
achieves the goal. Then, all of them celebrate their achievements
together.
 

PART B
 
ACCORDING TO CHANAKYA
 
Qualities of a Good Team
 
THE BEST WAY to learn teamwork is to observe nature. You will see
many examples of teamwork.
 
A flock of birds in the sky follows the laws of aerodynamics in
teamwork. The birds fly in a V-shaped formation. They are tuned to
each other and follow the leader. When that leader gets tired, it goes
behind and another bird becomes the leader. They help each other
during the long flight and reach their destination peacefully.
 
Ants always work in groups. Forming a perfect line, like a parade,
they march from one place to another. If a heavy piece of bread
cannot be carried by one ant alone, they help each other. An anthill
is a community staying together. They work hard during the good
times and collect food. During bad times, they share the food.
 
Crows also work in teams. When a crow sights food, it calls the
other crows and they all eat together. Again, when a crow is in
trouble, it calls the other crows. They protect the troubled one and
take it to safety.
 
In human beings, teamwork is best observed in villages. The
difference between a village and a city is often described as, “In a
village, the first person knows the last person. And in a city, we don’t
even know our neighbors.”
 

A village is a perfect unit of harmony and coexistence. If a new
person comes into the village, everyone knows if he is an enemy or
a friend. The village unites to fight an enemy and to welcome and
take care of a friend.
 
Marriages in villages are also community events. Villagers share the
responsibilities of the wedding too. Someone may sponsor the food;
another person may be responsible for the decoration; and someone
else may provide the vehicles required. The village works together
as a team for the event.
 
Once, the marriage procession of the bridegroom, the baaraat, was
returning from a village, without the marriage taking place. On being
asked why, someone from the procession said that the bride’s father
could not afford to pay the dowry, which the bridegroom’s party
asked for at the last moment. Even though dowry is illegal, it is part
of the wedding customs in some areas.
 
The bride’s father was understandably upset. Suddenly, a wealthy
man from the village announced, “Call the boy and his family back,
and ask the pandit to conduct the marriage. I will pay the dowry
right now!” He continued, “No baaraat has ever returned from our
village and it will not happen this time too.”
 
That is the association everyone in the community has with each
other. They not only share happiness, but also sad times.
 
The joint family system in India is another example of teamwork. If
a family had four sons, they all stayed together, along with their
wives and children. The running of the house was a collective
responsibility.
 
Irrespective of how much each one earned, all of them ate the same
food. If one of the brothers could not earn due to an accident or
unemployment, the remaining brothers made sure that he and his
family were taken care of. Their children’s upbringing, education and
marriages were all held together.

 
A joint family system also offers security. In such a system, there is
no requirement of a babysitter. The grandparents, aunts and elder
cousins take care of the small children. Children find friends within
their homes. They study together, play together, share their clothes
and even celebrate festivals together. This is truly teamwork.
 
However, teamwork also means acceptance. You need to ignore the
drawbacks of your team members, look at the positive aspects and
move ahead in life. The formula is, “Together we succeed.”
 
An ideal team has certain qualities, which Chanakya describes in the
Arthashastra (Book 6, Chapter 1, Verse 11) as follows:
 
   Obedient
   Not disappointed during marches
   Able to face challenges
   Experienced in fighting battles
   Skilled in war and weapons
   Has no separate self-interest
If you want to develop a good team, develop these qualities in your
team. If you already have these qualities, you are a good team and
a role model.
 
Creating a good team starts with the leader. If the leader of a good
team is bad, the team will get demotivated. On the other hand, a
good leader can transform an ordinary team into an efficient team.
 
Now, let us look at the qualities of a good team in detail.
 
   Obedient
 
There could be hundreds of opinions, but there must be only one
decision.
 

An ideal team is obedient and accepts the leader’s decision. That
means the team believes that the leader’s decision is for the benefit
of all. The team trusts the leader’s wisdom to take the right decision
for everyone.
 
If the leader is a man of integrity and values, he will look at the big
picture and consider everyone’s benefit.
 
Many leaders try to take decisions that will make them popular, but
leadership is also about taking the tough call.
 
During police training, a person who is not obedient is punished.
This punishment is to develop the quality of obedience. Before one
becomes a good leader, he has to become a good follower. The
leader in you will awaken only when you are an obedient follower.
 
This is the quality of Shraddha or perfect obedience again. Initially,
you may not understand why a particular decision is taken. You may
find it illogical and may not be convinced enough to do as the leader
says. But in the long term, you will find that the decision was for the
best.
 
A devotee, who worked under the great spiritual leader Swami
Chinmayananda once recalled, “I worked as a manager of the
ashram with him for many decades. In our meetings, he used to
take decisions which we could never understand. At times, I used to
rebel internally. Yet, I knew he was my guru and followed him
without any questions. In the long run, I understood the reasons.”
He continued, “I could never prove him wrong!”
 
Leaders think differently. They have often seen and understood the
matter much better than us. They have a wider outlook and have
seen the big picture.
 
This is not to say that followers should not have any opinion of their
own. Yet, followers have their limitations, and any decision taken
from this limited outlook may be counterproductive. When a follower

does not know what to do, he just needs to remember this: obey the
orders of the leader.
 
   Not disappointed during marches
 
A soldier once said, “The greatest tragedy is to retire without
fighting a battle.” For a soldier who has trained all his life to fight the
enemy, it truly is a waste to retire without using any of his
knowledge or skills.
 
In the police too, it is a sad situation, to have retired without
creating any positive impact. Whenever Sivanandhan was transferred
or took up any posting, he took it up as a challenge.
 
There are people who run away from troubles. They do not want to
face challenges. But to be disappointed by challenges is a waste of a
team’s skills. A team must be ready to march ahead and not look
back. It should take the first step and attack.
 
The real test of teamwork is during troubled times. In the
Mahabharata, Arjuna was in midst of the battlefield when he
developed cold feet and said he could not fight his family and
friends. It required psychological counseling by Shri Krishna in the
form of the Bhagawad Gita to bring him back to his senses and get
ready for war.
 
When the time for battle comes, do not apply for leave on health or
other pretexts. When the call comes, you have to get out of your
comfort zone, take up your weapons, pray to God to give you the
strength, stand erect and wait for orders.
 
Then, as the leader instructs, march ahead and give it your best
shot. Do not turn back until the battle is won. As the famous saying
goes, “Ours is not to make reply, ours is not to reason why, ours is
but to do and die.”
 

   Able to face challenges
 
Entering the battlefield does not mean winning the battle. As you get
in, you will find many challenges to overcome.
 
Therefore, the team has to develop the ability to face those
challenges.
 
The team must face the challenges and continue until the goal is
achieved. You may start with one strategy. And when you enter the
battlefield, you may need to change your strategy to counter the
enemy’s strategy. This goes on until one of you emerges a winner.
 
It is physically and mentally tiring to face challenge after challenge.
Yet, the leader keeps inspiring the team. At times, he will have to
give them a motivational speech; at other times, he will need to lead
by example. The highest level of inspiration has to be maintained by
the team.
 
Inspiration is the fuel that keeps a team going during troubled times.
Everyone in the team is then ready to sacrifice to win the battle.
 
During a war, the army is always on the lookout for fresh young
recruits. A widow had three sons. The eldest son decided to join as a
soldier. He lost his life. The second son, inspired by his elder brother,
also wanted to join the army. The neighbors advised the old woman
not to give permission. Yet, she did. The second son also lost his life.
The youngest son also decided to join the army and went to war
with the blessings of his mother. He was also killed.
 
The neighbors told the old woman, “You have lost all your sons. Did
we not tell you not to allow them to join the army? You will regret
this for the rest of your life.” The old lady replied, “I have just one
regret. I do not have a fourth son to send to the war.” This is true
patriotism; this is ignoring personal benefits for a higher goal.
 

A good team is comprised of people who set their personal goals
aside and focus on what they can contribute to the team’s goals.
 
   Experienced in fighting battles
 
Fighting battles exposes a soldier to real-world challenges. This
practical knowledge is more useful than the theory learnt in the
classroom. So when the challenge is overcome and the army wins
the battle, the soldiers return happier and more powerful than
before.
 
In such a situation, a soldier has been part of the team that made
things happen. He has lived the real story. He has real instances to
share with others. He can now guide others — show them the path
and the pitfalls.
 
Therefore, a good team should contain senior, experienced
members. They can share their experience of fighting previous
battles with the young men.
 
In most government organizations, generally three generations work
together. The senior-most generation, 50 years or more in age, is
wise and experienced. The second generation comprises people in
the mid-30s, who are also experienced but have a long way to go.
The third generation is the fresh recruits, who are in their 20s and
have yet to understand the real challenges.
 
A good organization will make sure that the three generations work
in sync with each other. The experienced members will share their
knowledge and wisdom with the younger ones. And the younger lot
will bring fresh ideas and new perspectives to the team.
 
A typical example is the computer era. The older generation is not
comfortable with technology. However, the young, tech- savvy boys
and girls in an organization can help the older generation learn these
skills.

 
   Skilled in war and weapons
 
No war can be fought without weapons. Yet, the man behind the
machine is more important than the machine. A good team needs to
have a mix of strategy and resources. A leader has to ensure that
both are in place.
 
A team may have the required weapons without knowing how to use
them. In this case, the leader has to ensure that the team is given
adequate training.
 
For example, many organizations purchase the latest computers, but
their old employees do not use them, due to fear of technology,
complacency, reluctance to leave their comfort zone or unwillingness
to learn. In this case, the organization’s leaders must find a way
around these barriers and help employees to learn new skills.
 
Sometimes, a team’s resources are not used optimally. For example,
most mobile phones today have a plethora of functions, but a study
has revealed that almost 90% of these applications are not used by
users. Similarly, a simple program like Microsoft Excel can be used
for programming but is used most often as a calculator.
 
While we may not use all the applications on the mobile phone or
computer, at least some of them should be used at the optimum
level.
 
Those who are skilled in war, meaning those who are tactful, should
document their ideas and share them with others. Some people have
the ability or knack to get to the heart of the matter immediately. If
a person in a team has such a skill, he should share it with others
and help the team develop that skill.
 
A good team is one that understands the problem immediately and
finds quick solutions.

 
In the police force, for example, investigating cases is teamwork,
where the team uses the help of its various members and experts to
nab the culprit quickly.
 
   Has no separate self-interest
 
All members of the team should be connected to the team’s vision.
Even if one person is selfish, it can destroy the whole plan. One
rotten apple can ruin the whole basket.
 
A leader should have the ability to pick that rotten apple and
eliminate it from the system before it can cause severe damage. In
the movie Company, you will see an instance of this. The actor,
Mohanlal plays the role of Sivanandhan, the police officer. In the
film, an inspector in his core team is an informer to the underworld.
He nabs the culprit through phone tapping and eliminates the rotten
apple of the team.
 
One of the reasons for corruption, whether in government or in
business organizations, is that men in power forget their
responsibilities and misuse the power given to them for selfish ends.
They start taking bribes. If the leader starts taking bribes, it is easy
for his team members to follow.
 
Good teams are formed by people who have the attitude of service
to others, also called Seva Bhav. If we can bring that back in our
generation, the future of our nation will be brighter, and history will
look upon us with pride and enthusiasm.
 

PART C
 
LEADERSHIP IN ACTION
 
Inspiring Your Team
 
Coming together is a beginning.
Keeping together is progress.
Working together is success.
 
HENRY FORD
 
SIVANANDHAN’S CAREER CLEARLY illustrates that the key to success
is having an effective team. The leader has to create that team. A
person may start as a one-man army, but success comes from
teamwork.
 
When you look at a good team, you will find there is a great leader
leading from the front. In Sivanandhan’s life too, his success was
due to his seniors who allowed him to perform the task in hand and
encouraged him to do better.
 
He proactively utilized the media and received wide media coverage
during his career. Yet, none of his seniors felt that he was hogging
the limelight. They were his role models, as he was a role model for
his subordinates.
 
Creating a good team is important for a leader. When we study
history, we find that good leaders had great teams. Akbar had the

Navratnas, the nine gems in his team, his think-tank. It consisted of
experts in various fields like Birbal, the clever minister and Tansen,
the well-known singer.
 
Shivaji had a good team of ministers too – they were called the
Ashta-adhyaksha. The eight ministers of his core team were
dedicated to his cause. These team members were an important
part of the work that Shivaji did.
 
Similarly, Sivanandhan too had his dedicated team members who
were instrumental in getting results. Here’s how his team and team-
building skills embody Chanakya’s description of a good team.
 
   Obedient
 
Creating a Dand or army is like bringing up a group of children with
love, care and attention. Each child is different and has to be
handled in a different way. Like the coach of a sports team, the
leader has to select the players carefully. Next, he has to hit the
ground and give them training. There should be good and
continuous practice.
 
When required, a little bit of punishment also has to be given. Make
sure the team members do not take things for granted. Discipline is
required so that the work in hand is taken seriously. Finally, when
the time comes, all of them should be focused on the goal to be
achieved as one strong unit.
 
Sivanandhan knew that it was good to have obedient people in his
team. If he found indiscipline, he knew that obedience could be
achieved through various methods, including punishments.
 
Retired Assistant Commissioner of Police, Dashrath Avhad, who
worked with Sivanandhan, has this to say about the latter’s team-
building skills, “As a leader, he forgave mistakes and gave his team
of officers time to rectify their mistakes. He also encouraged them.

One of his rules was very clear. He rarely spoke to the officer or
commented on his report file when he was angry. He waited for
some time to pass and for him to cool down and then wrote his
comments. None of his actions were on the spur of the moment. He
was very balanced in his approach.
 
“Welfare of the police force was also one of his top priorities. He
respected the police officer, irrespective of the designation. He
particularly took care of the constables, the lowest rung in the force
and often the most neglected lot. Wherever he was posted, he
would strive for the welfare of the constables. He ensured that their
children got good education and motivated them to study and make
progress.”
 
Thus, obedience can also be achieved through encouragement and
taking care of your team’s welfare.
 
   Not disappointed during marches
 
In a government department such as the police, where transfers are
part of the job, you work with different teams. Each team is unique
and has its strengths and weaknesses. Often, you do not get to
select the team you will lead. Either you are imposed upon them as
a leader, or they are imposed upon you as a team.
 
Even then, Sivanandhan was always on the lookout for officers to
build his core team. The qualities he searched for were integrity
coupled with performance. It is a rare combination indeed. There are
people, who are honest, but their honesty becomes a bottleneck and
they do not produce results. There are others who are result-
oriented but achieve their goals by unethical means.
 
This was Sivanandhan’s special skill — to identify such dedicated
officers who would readily take up the mantle when it was time for
action.
 

   Experienced in fighting battles
 
The most important instance of brilliant teamwork is the eradication
of the underworld nexus during his posting as Jt CP (crime) in
Mumbai. A good team needs to have excellent coordination,
communication and also obedience to the leader.
 
Coordination is important in teams. In the case of police, it can be a
matter of life and death. Even if one person makes a mistake, the
whole team can get affected. It is like making a pyramid from a pack
of cards. One builds the pyramid slowly and carefully. Even if one of
the cards is placed wrongly, the whole pyramid can come down in a
split second.
 
In the same manner, when a police team is working, extreme
coordination among the members is essential.
 
Communication is essential among team members and also with the
team leader. In the thick of action, the leader acts like the control
tower. He gathers information from the team members, analyzes the
situation and takes quick decisions. At times, the team members
may also need to take decisions.
 
One more issue a team can face is egos of the various members. To
keep a check on the same and make sure the team stands united is
not an easy task.
 
Purely thanks to perfect teamwork, the team got seven President’s
medals for Meritorious Service and Sivanandhan was awarded a
President’s medal for Distinguished Service. Of all the President’s
medals awarded to the Mumbai police that year, only one medal
went to another team. It was not Sivanandhan’s individual
performance that got the awards; his entire team was a winner.
 
This shows Sivanandhan’s team was now experienced in fighting
many wars with the underworld. Having fought many battles, they
were able to restore peace.

 
   Skilled in wars and weapons
 
Sivanandhan used various means to improve the skills of the police
force. He organized four seminars after the Mumbai terror attack to
provide intellectual inputs to his team.
 
Focusing on the theme “Preparedness to Fight against Terrorism”,
these seminars brought together eminent experts. Some of these
were 
APJ 
Abdul 
Kalam 
– 
former 
president 
of 
India, 
K
Shankaranarayanan – Governor of Maharashtra, MK Narayanan –
Intelligence Bureau chief, RR Patil – Home Minister of Maharashtra,
Julio Ribeiro – one of the most respected top cops who was
instrumental in the crackdown on Sikh militants during the ’80s as
DGP of Punjab police, AN Roy – DGP of Maharashtra Police, Shyamal
Dutta – Former Governor of Nagaland, Commodore Udaya Bhaskar –
a reputed security analyst, Anil Kakodkar – Chairman of Atomic
Energy Commission of India, Dr Raghunath Anant Mashelkar –
Director General of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
(CSIR) and advisor to the prime minister, MJ Akbar – one of India’s
most distinguished journalists, Kumar Ketkar – editor of Loksatta, a
popular Marathi newspaper, Sundeep Waslekar – an advisor to
various governments across the globe, Gopalaswami Parthasarathy –
a distinguished diplomat, Bahukutumbai Raman – former head of the
counterterrorism wing of India’s Research and Analysis Wing
(R&AW), KPS Gill – former DGP of Punjab, Pravin Swami – associate
editor of The Hindu, and Dr Ashok Bhan, former DGP of Jammu and
Kashmir.
 
These experts spoke on topics such as steps to preempt terrorism,
timely and tactical intelligence to win the war against terrorism,
thinking one step ahead of the terrorists and the corporatization of
terror.
 
These seminars gave the attending police officers different
perspectives of the same subject. Sharp minds sharing their

experiences is the best training one can give to his team.
 
Another way of skill-building is to encourage team members to read
books. As we have seen in previous chapters, Sivanandhan started
many libraries in various police offices. Thousands of books on
diverse subjects, such as management, health, leadership, arts and
literature, were purchased and distributed among the policemen to
encourage the reading habit. Police officers, who earlier did not get
the time to read because of their busy schedules, now had easier
access to books as they were available in the police offices itself.
 
To build skills for war in a team, training is very important.
Sivanandhan achieved this by creating training centers.
 
Sivanandhan paid special attention to organizing regular training
programs for team building. Setting up new, world-class training
centers was a part of his passion and work.
 
   Has no separate self-interest
 
The Mumbai terror attack shook the whole world. Though the
Mumbai Police got into action rapidly, it was not equipped for a war-
like situation. As a result, many policemen, including senior officers,
lost their lives, and it took hours and days to bring down the
terrorists.
 
This shows that the Mumbai Police, even though it was not ready,
did not wait to get into action. There was no separate self-interest.
Many lost their lives too in the process.
 
   Able to face challenges
 
One of the major takeaways from this experience was that precious
hours are lost in the time taken for the Army and the National
Security Guards (NSG) to arrive into the city.

 
Organizing training programs is good, but the best way to establish
continuous training as a system is to set up training institutions.
Apart from the Maharashtra Intelligence Academy and other training
centers at various points in his career, Sivanandhan was instrumental
in setting up Force 1 after the Mumbai terror attack.
 
Force 1 is an elite commando force, a specialized counter-terrorism
unit to guard Mumbai. It was formed under the supervision of
Sivanandhan by the Government of Maharashtra.
 
It is on the lines of the NSG with headquarters in Mumbai. Force 1
was commissioned on 24 November, 2009.
 
The commandos of Force 1 are given the best training. They are
trained in the use of sophisticated arms and explosives, which can
be used in rapid shooting. To get the best of world-class training,
two months of basic training was given by Israeli specialists.
 
In parallel, the central government also set up a regional hub of NSG
in Mumbai. However, Force 1 is expected to be part of the initial
response to any terror strike in Mumbai.
 
Force 1 takes only 15 minutes to respond to a terror strike. Its speed
and swiftness to action is its strength.
 
To create an institution like Force 1 in a short period of time was not
easy. But Sivanandhan had the ability to put up with the troubles
that came on the way and finally produce results.
 
The Maharashtra Intelligence Academy was set up in 2009 in Pune.
The objective was to train police officers in intelligence gathering,
especially regarding terrorist networks and activities. After a year-
long training, these officers would then be recruited as Intelligence
Officers to the State Intelligence Department (SID).
 

These officers will remain in the intelligence force for 25-30 years
and periodic and refresher courses will be given to upgrade their
skills. It has been a very successful model.
 
Furthermore, for good teams to be created, the leader needs to
inspire and motivate them. This can happen only if the team
expends efforts beyond what is required by its scope of work. It is
said that if one has to win a game on the field, it depends on the
efforts put off the field.
 
Sivanandhan organized a lot of activities to encourage bonding in
the police force.
 
One such mega event was the 100 years of Maharashtra Police
Games in 2006. The first Police Games were held in 1906; when
Sivanandhan realized this, he saw a golden opportunity to bring all
the policemen together through a spirit of competition and
sportsmanship.
 
The centenary year of the Maharashtra Police Games was a hugely
successful event that enthused the whole police force.
 
Therefore, through these events, he ensured inclusive growth in the
team. One of Sivanandhan’s hobbies is to organize events. He used
his event management skills to bring in various sportsmen,
Bollywood stars and celebrities to participate and entertain the police
force. These included Sachin Tendulkar, Aamir Khan and other top
actors.
 
Many policemen have unique talents which they never get an
opportunity to display in their strenuous work schedules. He
encouraged his team members to participate in stage shows like
dance and drama. During the Kala Ghoda festival of Mumbai, the
police had put up a special stall, where policemen displayed their
painting and art skills.
 

One final but important quality of a leader is to give credit to the
team members. Share your success with the people.
 
When a problem comes to you, take the responsibility. When you
achieve success, you give the credit to your team members. Thus,
they are inspired to work with enthusiasm.
 
During his three-year tenure as Deputy Inspector General of Police,
Nagpur range, he was ably assisted by dedicated and brilliant
superintendents in the police in all the six districts. Sivanandhan had
delegated all his financial powers to them. Since these areas were
Naxal-infested, taking care of security and building morale in the
force were of paramount importance.
 
Sivanandhan impressed the then Addl Chief Secretary (Home), and
through an empowered committee, got financial sanctions for huge
amounts of money to reform all the police stations, which were
temporary sheds made out of tin sheets. These structures had flimsy
compound walls and would frequently be attacked by Naxals.
Sivanandhan undertook the major task of revamping all the
compound walls to make them so strong that the Naxals would
never dare attack again. He also constructed pucca (permanent and
strong) structures inside the fortified walls so that his men within felt
safe. Not a single attack took place after that.
 
He also visited them frequently to mingle with them and boost their
morale. The parliamentary and the state legislature elections took
place without any untoward incident, in spite of the Naxal call for a
ban and the neighboring state of Andhra Pradesh witnessing a lot of
violence.
 
Sivanandhan had a medical examination conducted for the
commandos in an orthopedic hospital and proved that the shoes
worn by the personnel, which were issued by the government, were
detrimental to their bones. He got special shoes custom-made for
jungle operations. He also canvassed with the government and got

their 
daily 
refreshment 
allowance 
doubled, 
simultaneously
encouraging the government to build two private housing colonies
for the policemen. One of these is located near Gadchiroli and the
other is in Chandrapur.
 
Two police schools built by Sivanandhan in Chandrapur and
Gadchiroli towns are still running very well. He arranged to build
proper guest houses in each district headquarters for the police
officers and men to stay during their visits. During his tenure as DGP
of the state, Sivanandhan succeeded in arranging for a wet lease of
Pawan Hans helicopters, so that all men wounded in the Naxal
ambushes could be evacuated immediately to Nagpur for medical
treatment. Many lives have been saved so far due to this initiative.
 
Any leader should develop three qualities – an open mind to receive
new ideas from his team, a broad shoulder to take responsibilities of
the team and a large heart to accept the weaknesses of the team
members.
 
When the team finally wins the game, celebrating success is also
required.
 
Appreciate the hard work and commitment of each team member.
Each of them has given personal sacrifices to reach the goal. Each of
them has played a small role in reaching the big goal. Even nuts and
bolts are required for a big machine to produce the required goods.
 
Give credit to the last man. Even those who may not have played
the game, but have been cheering in the stands, are required to win
the game. Even they are part of the success. Therefore, teamwork is
all-inclusive. A leader understands this and with the team backing
him, confidently proceeds towards the next big game….
 
The final secret is the mitra. The next chapter will focus on how
friends help you grow in your career and life.
 

   TIPS TO INSPIRE YOUR TEAM   
 
1.   Identify your people: Look for people who are honest and
achieve results.
2.   Go beyond work: Teamwork is inspiring people beyond the
work they do in office.
3.   Impart training: Create world-class institutions and training
programs.
4.   Encourage people: Organize events, including sports and
entertainment.
5.   Give credit: Share successes with your team.
The Leader in Me
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 7
 
Mitra
ALLY/CONSULTANT
 
Swami the king
Amatya the minister
Janpada the country
Durg the fortified city
Kosha the treasury
Dand the army
Mitra the ally
 

PART A
 
THE SEVENTH SECRET
 
Mitra: The Ally or Consultant
 
MITRA, A WORD commonly used in all Indian languages, means a
friend, buddy, colleague or partner. It forms the last pillar of
Chanakya’s Seven Pillars model.
 
Even the most powerful king requires a mitra, for the friend is with
you through thick and thin, in good times and bad.
 
He is the friend, philosopher and guide. You can depend upon him
and he is true to you. He can hold up a mirror and show you what is
real.
 
He can tell you when your breath smells bad, without you feeling
offended. He is the lighthouse that shows you the way. He is the
consultant who offers you the right advice at the right time.
 
This seventh secret can change the dynamics of any game. A friend
can make or break you completely.
 
The story of the Mahabharata illustrates the importance of choosing
the right advisor at the right time. Before the war at Kurukshetra
was to begin, the Pandavas and the Kauravas were seeking allies.
Both wanted Krishna on their side. Therefore, Arjuna on behalf of
the Pandavas, and Duryodhana representing the Kauravas went to
meet Krishna.
 

Krishna was asleep when they arrived, so they decided to wait till he
woke up. Arjuna waited near Krishna’s feet, while Duryodhana sat
beside his head.
 
When Krishna woke up, he asked them the purpose of their visit.
Both requested Krishna for an alliance in the forthcoming war
against each other. Krishna could not accept one’s request and
refuse the other, for he was a cousin to both of them.
 
The quick-witted Krishna replied, “I will support both of you. On one
side will be my entire army of experienced warriors, fully armed. And
on the other side will be myself, but I will be unarmed and will not
fight in the war. Each of you can choose which you want.”
 
Krishna added, “Since I saw Arjuna first when I woke up and he is
younger to you, Duryodhana, I will give him the opportunity to
choose first.”
 
Arjuna unhesitatingly chose Krishna. Duryodhana, who was worried
that Arjuna might choose Krishna’s powerful army, was now secretly
delighted. He thought that with Krishna’s army on his side, he could
not lose the war; and that Arjuna had made a wrong choice by
choosing only Krishna who would not fight.
 
However, the Pandavas won the war due to Krishna’s strategic advice
at every turn. As Arjuna’s charioteer, Krishna was always with them,
guiding them slowly towards success.
 
Such is the power of choosing the right advisor. An intelligent person
is the biggest asset of any team or organization.
 
Successful companies understand the value of good advisors.
Therefore, they have advisory panels which guide them from time to
time.
 
A student wanted to learn to play the flute. He had two choices — a
mediocre teacher who would charge a lower fee, and a very good

teacher whose fee the student could not afford. However, he still
wanted to get the best possible choice. An expert’s services may be
costly, but he can help you reach the goal faster. You will commit
fewer mistakes if you have the best advisor on your side.
 
Therefore, the student went to the best teacher and explained his
deep desire to learn the flute from him. He also explained that he
would not be able to pay the high fees, but was willing to offer
services in kind as compensation.
 
The teacher laughed, “The high fee is just to filter the students who
come to me. I am happy there is a burning desire to learn in you.
Come from tomorrow; you don’t have to pay any fee.”
 
A good teacher also requires a good student. In the same way, a
good advisor requires a person who would understand and
implement the advice. So, if you are ready to take advice, listen to
only the best. It will then be a win-win situation for you and your
advisor.
 
A friend is ready to help you in crises. Even the two World Wars are
the stories of group of allies.
 
If you have seen the television game show Kaun Banega Crorepati
or Who Wants to Be a Millionaire, you will know that one of the
“lifelines” for the player is “Phone a friend”. The friend comes to the
player’s rescue when the player is stuck. This is the best and most
powerful tool one can apply.
 
So, when the going gets tough, take the help of mitras.
 
Some people hesitate or feel belittled if they have to ask for help.
This is disaster. There should not be any ego connected to reaching
out to a friend. No one is perfect. Therefore, asking a friend for help
can save a lot of trouble. Make use of friends and let friends use
you. Friendship is always a win-win situation for both parties. It is
mutual give and take.

 
In friendship, happiness is shared and sorrows are divided.
 
How does one develop friends? You must have a friendly nature. You
should genuinely want to make friends, rather than just use other
people for your benefit. You should also be open-minded towards
people who come into your life.
 
A leader is open-minded, and therefore, ready to learn from
everyone.
 
Chanakya advised leaders to learn from everyone, including children.
Children may not have knowledge and experience, but they are
pure, open-minded and truthful. They sometimes give insights that
many adults overlook. Their opinions are not colored by selfish
desires. Therefore, to listen to children is to listen to the voice of
God.
 
Once, a king wanted the world’s most beautiful clothes to be made
for him. The tailor missed the deadline and showed the king an
imaginary outfit, describing it as his masterpiece. The king could not
see anything, but did not want to be considered a fool for not being
able to see the outfit. The tailor pretended to dress the king in the
outfit, though in reality, the king had not worn anything.
 
The king went in a procession to display his new clothes. All the
citizens on the streets did not want to get punished for pointing out
the truth, so they heaped praises on the king’s clothes.
 
Suddenly, a child on the street started laughing and shouting, “The
king is naked.” Everyone was shocked and expected the king to
punish the little one.
 
Yet, that statement brought the king to his senses. He realized his
mistake and the fool he had made of himself in his desire for self-
glorification. Instead of punishing the child, he appreciated the child
for being the only honest person in his whole kingdom.

 
Thus, even a child can be your ally, giving you wisdom and common
sense. But then, as Voltaire said, “Common sense is not so
common.”
 
That is why everyone requires a friend, who can be a guide,
consultant and advisor.
 
In the Arthashastra, various sutras or verses describe the qualities of
good consultants and a leader’s need for good consultants and
advisors.
 
In Book 1, Chapter 15, Verses 2, 35 and 40 of the Arthashastra,
Chanakya says,
 
"All undertakings should be preceded by consultation. Holding a
consultation with only one, he may not be able to reach a decision in
difficult matters. With more councilors, it is difficult to reach
decisions and maintain secrecy.”
 
A king is as good or bad as his advisors. Therefore, the leader has to
be selective in his choice of advisors and the advice he gets,
because the decisions he takes based on the advice can make or
break a nation.
 
Remember the story in the Ramayana when Kaikayee was wrongly
advised by Manthara and the crown prince was exiled on the day of
the crowning ceremony. Kaikayee herself was happy about Rama
becoming the king, but wrong advice from her advisor had far-
reaching implications for the kingdom.
 
Therefore, Chanakya’s warning must be heeded.
 
Let us explore this verse further.
 
   All undertakings

 
The important word is “all”. All activities, small or big, should be
preceded by consultation. Always consult others before you start any
project or assignment. Thus, you will think along with others and not
alone.
 
Say, you want to buy new office. Ask a consultant and a few other
people and then start. You will be able to learn more about the
advantages and disadvantages of the office space you are
considering. Thus, it will be easier to take a decision.
 
   Holding a consultation with only one
 
Having a single advisor will make you too dependent on that person.
He may guide you, but there is also the danger that he may
misguide you. Take a second opinion.
 
When a doctor says a particular condition is not curable, do not get
depressed and stop there; try another doctor. In many medical
cases, a second opinion has helped cure diseases that were
considered incurable by the first doctor.
 
The second doctor can often bring in a fresh perspective, which
helps to cure the patient. In short, Chanakya says, never be
dependent on any one person.
 
Good organizations have more than one consultant, as well as more
than one vendor and supplier. This is a way of spreading risks.
Especially when an organization is faced with complex issues, it will
require the inputs of more than one consultant.
 
A management consultant explains, “If your business is completely
dependent on one client, you will have to go as per the whims and
fancies of that client. The client can control your pricing and
finances, and without your knowledge, it will become a one-sided

game. Therefore, the best strategy is to have at least five clients,
that is, 20% dependency on each client.”
 
However, the reverse is also true. If you have too many advisors and
keep taking each one’s suggestions, you will get confused and will
find it difficult to take a decision.
 
There is this story of a farmer and his son, who purchased a donkey.
They were returning home with their purchase. A passerby
suggested, “Why don’t one of you sit on the donkey? That way, you
can save your energy.” The father sat on the donkey and the son
walked alongside.
 
Further down the road, another passerby commented, “Look at the
father. He is comfortably sitting on the donkey and is making his son
walk in the heat.” The father felt guilty and asked the son to take his
place.
 
They had gone some distance when they met another passerby.
“Look at the son,” said the passerby. “He does not know his duty
towards his father. Our culture asks the son to work for his parents’
comfort.” The father and son were confused now. Finally, they both
decided to sit on the donkey.
 
As they were nearing home, a passerby commented, “What a
tragedy! The poor donkey has to carry the weight of these two cruel
men. Nobody thinks about the mute donkey.”
 
The father and son considered this and decided to carry the donkey
on their shoulders.
 
When they reached home, the farmer’s wife commented, “What a
useless family I have! Could you not just walk home with the
donkey? Why are you carrying it on your shoulders?”
 
“That is exactly how we started the journey!” said the father and
son.

 
Thus, it is foolish to take everyone’s advice. There is a difference
between advice and opinion. Opinion is a personal matter, but advice
must be taken only from mature and intelligent people. Comments
are not advice. Advice is given after seriously thinking through
issues.
 
When you go to someone for advice, you will have to explain your
problem clearly to the person concerned. If you do that with a
hundred people, your problem will be known to the whole world and
it will no more be a secret.
 
So, what is the solution?
 
In the Arthashastra, Book 1, Chapter 15, Verses 20-21, Chanakya
says,
 
"Therefore sit and counsel with those who are mature in intellect.”
 
We should therefore choose our consultants very carefully.
 
   Mature in intellect
 
It is very important for a consultant to be mature in “intellect”. The
consultant can be young in age, yet mature in that particular field.
This is often seen in the police force.
 
For example, in the case of cyber crimes, the experts are generally
young police officers. They understand the issues better than most
senior officers.
 
   Sit and counsel
 
Sitting here is symbolic. The term Upanishad means sitting below a
spiritual master and listening to his wisdom. Similarly, when you are

sitting with a mature and intelligent person, you should be receptive
like a good student in class.
 
Also, do not just listen to your advisor as if he were delivering a
sermon. Discuss the problem with him; ask him questions to obtain
clarity on the issues concerned.
 
The time taken out for consultation is a very serious affair. It is not
just a casual meeting. It means business for both parties.
 
Chanakya goes to the extent of saying that when one is getting
counsel, there should not be any disturbance. Consultation requires
a secluded space. Therefore, make sure your mobile phone is
switched off; you do not browse the internet and are not distracted
by other, unrelated issues during a consultation.
 
Kings were instructed to have a panel of advisors — the council of
ministers — with whom they would spend time daily to discuss the
matters of the state.
 
Akbar had the Navratnas, the nine jewels, as he called them. These
nine experts were his personal counselors. They were from different
fields. Therefore, he could get different perspectives on each issue.
 
Shivaji Maharaj had Ashta-Pradhan, eight heads of various
departments. These were his core team members and all strategies
and action plans were made with their help.
 
Why think alone when there are other experts who can think with
you?
 
You will often find businessmen, who are not very qualified, but
successfully run multinational companies. The secret of such a
businessman’s success is that his team comprises highly educated
and globally experienced people. They are paid well and taken care
of, and in return, they bring their experience and expertise to the
company.

 
Make sure to pay your advisors very well. Consultants cannot be
valued in terms of money. They are an asset by themselves. In a
way, all of a consultant’s advice is free, and on the other hand, all of
it is priceless. You cannot bargain or negotiate for good advice.
Consulting firms that do this devalue their consultants.
 
One of the strengths of Duryodhana was that he took excellent care
of his team. In the Kurukshetra war, the best warriors of that
generation — Bheeshma, Dronacharya, Kripacharya and Karna —
were with the Kauravas.
 
Duryodhana took good care of them. When Karna was insulted,
Duryodhana gave a part of his kingdom to him. He made Karna a
king from nothing.
 
Is that not a quality that we should learn from Duryodhana?
 
He kept his team members and advisors happy and satisfied. So,
they were with him during the war, despite knowing Duryodhana
was in the wrong. They showered him with valuable advice to take
the right path. Duryodhana may not have followed their advice, yet
all the great men stuck with him till the end of their lives.
 
If you take care of your consultants, they will take care of you. In
most organizations, the consultant becomes a part of the family and
stays with the organization forever. He truly becomes the mitra, the
true friend who will be with you till the last breath.
 
In a war, a soldier returned safely from the enemy camp. However,
he found out that his friend was missing and insisted on going back
into enemy territory. His commander said, “It is meaningless to go
back and give up your life.” But the soldier, for once, did not pay
heed.
 
When he came back, he was riddled with bullets but brought his
dead friend on his shoulder. The commander said, “I had lost one

soldier; I am now going to lose two. Did it make any sense for you
to go back?”
 
The soldier said, “I found my friend lying in the enemy camp nearly
dead. When I reached him, he said, ‘I knew you would come.’
 
“Sir, it did make sense for me to listen to those last words, because I
could give up my life, but not my friendship.” And he died.
 

PART B
 
ACCORDING TO CHANAKYA
 
Qualities of a Good Ally
 
LEADERS CANNOT WALK the path alone. Like anyone else, they too
require companions. There is a saying, “It is lonely at the top,” but
you can make friends with others who are at the top.
 
Seek friends lifelong. Friendship is about companionship. It is the
shoulder you can lean upon when you feel low.
 
Look at other leaders, not necessarily those from your field. You can
learn from various leadership styles.
 
Harsha Bhogle, the famous cricket commentator, once said, “What
do cricketers know if they know only about cricket!”
 
This is a profound statement. A cricketer can learn from a swimmer,
a golfer, a tennis player or a football player. The sport may be
different, but he can learn from different sportspersons. Champions
learn from others champions. Winners learn from other winners.
Leaders learn from other leaders.
 
Leaders also evolve to the next level. They want to grow; to learn,
unlearn and relearn. They want to share their knowledge and
experience.
 
Once you are in a leadership position, it becomes fun. It becomes a
hobby and a game. And you require friends to play games. You

require like-minded people. Then, life is not just easy, but a
continuous learning process.
 
Chanakya says, while choosing your allies, you should look for some
qualities. The qualities of a good ally given in the Arthashastra (Book
6, Chapter 1, Verse 12) are:
 
   Alliance from the days of your father/grandfather
   Greatness
   Constancy
   Self-control
   No separate self-interest
   Ability to mobilize quickly
One day, a child joined a new school. On his first day, the child was
quiet and reserved and came home sad and depressed.
 
His mother asked, “Did you not like the school? Did you not make
any new friends today?”
 
The boy replied, “The school is very good. The teachers are nice. All
the other children came and spoke to me.”
 
“Then what is the problem? Why are you sad?” asked the mother.
 
“My problem is, I could not decide who is a good friend and who is
not.”
 
Most of us are like this child in a new school. No one can decide in
the very first instance who a good friend is. But you still have to take
the first step. Begin by being friendly to others. In the long run,
some friends go out of your life and some stay back as lifelong
friends.
 
There are some universal qualities you can consider when you
choose your friends for life.
 

   Alliance from the days of your father/grandfather
 
This refers to family friends whom you have known for two or three
generations. Many friendships come to you unasked. For instance,
your father and the friend’s father have known each other for a long
time; they are regular visitors to your house and you visit their
house regularly.
 
The families know each other very well and have supported each
other in difficult times. You have heard stories about the friendship
of your parents. One learns the value of friendship in such an
environment.
 
Such family friendships could also be built over three generations —
the grandfather’s generation, your father’s generation and then your
generation. This is symbolic, yet shows how deep the friendship has
grown.
 
In many cases, marriages take place between families that have
been friends for generations. The children feel comfortable as they
have known each other since childhood. It is like sending the child
from one home to another. Since there is perfect tuning among the
families, it is easy to adjust.
 
The longer you know a friend, the better your rapport. Both know
each other’s strengths and weaknesses, both know how the other
person thinks. If you were to start a business venture, which of
these would you choose as a partner: a friend whom you have
known for over thirty years or a person whom you have recently
met? You would choose the former, because of your understanding
with each other, built over the years you have spent together.
 
   Greatness
 
When two people become partners, it is important to respect each
other. No two people can think alike; therefore, each person’s focus

should be to discover the strengths of the other partner. Both
partners’ strengths should be complementary. Then, it becomes a
self-supporting relationship.
 
In business houses, we find that different partners come with
different strengths. If one partner is good at finance, another’s
strength is marketing, while the third is good at operations.
 
Your friend should be “great” means that he or she should have
qualities that you admire, that you wish to possess.
 
In life, you will make good and bad friends. A person is known by
the kind of friends he has. Good friends can make you, while bad
friends can destroy you. Therefore, it is important to have good and
“great” friends.
 
Good friendship is called Sat-sang in Sanskrit. It is the company of
good, noble and spiritual people. Bad friendship is called Ku-sang,
the company of evil or bad people.
 
It is the prime duty of parents to ensure that their children are
always in good company.
 
Sometimes, an average person also becomes great by being in the
company of the great. He imbibes noble virtues from his friends and
progresses in life.
 
It is like a piece of iron in the company of a strong magnet. In time,
the iron piece imbibes the qualities of the magnet and starts
attracting other iron pieces.
 
On the other hand, a person may be as pure as milk, but when a
drop of lemon spills into the milk, irreversible damage can be done.
The case of chain smokers and drug addicts is an indication of the
consequences of bad company.
 

Once a devotee was praying and the Lord appeared to grant him a
boon. The devotee said, “Oh Lord, bless me that I am always in the
company of noble and good-hearted souls.” There cannot be any
greater boon than that.
 
   Constancy
 
Everyone wants to associate with successful people. However, very
few people support you during the struggle for success. In success,
friends know you; and in failure, you know who your friends are.
 
Therefore, Chanakya points out that the quality of a good friend is to
be constant — in times of struggle, failure and also success.
 
There is a Marathi saying, “Kama purta mama,” meaning you
become a relative only when the need arises. After the work is done,
you forget the person. Such friends are like parasites.
 
Good friends are for all seasons. They stay by you constantly. They
love you unconditionally. These friends are the real asset in your life.
 
Remember what a great saint said, “Money never makes you rich. It
is friends who make you rich. Money comes and goes. But good
friends stay with you forever.”
 
Leaders need to understand who their real friends are.
 
Good times or bad times may come and go, but friendship remains
forever. The secret of success for every leader lies in the number of
his real friends. This is the asset the leader has to develop during his
lifetime. In certain communities, the success of a man is measured
by the number of people who attend his funeral.
 
   Self-control
 

This is another test to find out if you have the right friend on your
side. He should have self-control. A person who keeps his mind and
senses under control can never go wrong. This person will never
cross the limit.
 
He is disciplined, well-mannered and well-behaved. He has a
balanced view and does not lose his cool in any situation. Such a
person is strong from within.
 
He controls his thoughts, speech and actions when required. He is
not impulsive. He thinks through the consequences before he acts.
 
Such a friend is a controlled spender too. He is not a miser; yet he
will never show off, just because he has the capacity to spend. He
never gambles. His purchases are not impulsive. He is not attracted
by the lure of credit cards and spends only where needed. He is
classy but not flashy.
 
Being in the company of such a person will also help you develop
self-control.
 
He is surrounded by goodness and attracts goodness. He is an
inspiration. He speaks words of wisdom. He knows the difference
between right and wrong. He is a thinker and also a doer. He is
humility personified.
 
Wouldn’t you like to make such a person your friend, philosopher
and guide? With such a friend, your life would be complete and
fulfilled.
 
   No separate self-interest
 
A true mitra never thinks of his benefit alone. He thinks win-win. He
makes sure that all of you succeed together. There is no separate or
individual interest for him in any project or assignment.
 

For instance, Sivanandhan upheld the value of benefit to society
during his police career. At the end of his career, he counts the
goodwill and the benefits accrued to society as his biggest assets.
 
You may also know many such friends who work selflessly towards
the welfare of the society and nation. Such people pray for the
benefit of mankind. They are the noble ones.
 
On the other hand, a friend who always thinks only of his personal
benefits will lose all his existing friends and will be lonely towards
the end.
 
Friendship can exist not only among individuals, but also among
organizations. They come together and create a win-win situation for
each other. They focus on everyone’s benefit rather than individual
benefit.
 
For example, mobile operators today share the same transmission
towers. Instead of spending more on installing additional towers,
they have entered a mutually beneficial arrangement to share each
other’s towers.
 
Many international organizations, and even the police force, have
exchange programs. They mutually exchange employees for
participation in training programs. This helps to share knowledge
and experience among organizations working in different countries,
which helps both organizations to be proactive and more alert
towards future events and calamities.
 
Some organizations also conduct research together. They bring out
unique products and services, for which they own joint intellectual
property rights (IPR), and share the resultant financial successes.
 
The concept of associations is similar. Business groups come
together to form associations. Individual companies may have lower
bargaining power, but together, they work on common problems and

protest against government policies that may be harmful to their
industry.
 
Business networks are powerful places where people come together
for their mutual interests. There is no separate interest for anyone.
 
The true strength of friends lies in collaboration, not competition.
 
Dr Abdul Kalam said, “In the past, leadership style was about
competition. Today, it is about collaboration.”
 
Come together, collaborate and think win-win. It is a surefire formula
for success.
 
   Ability to mobilize quickly
 
A good associate will be able to come to your aid immediately. His is
the emergency number you can dial without thinking twice.
 
A true friend will know when you need him, even when you do not
tell him. He is mentally attuned to your needs.
 
A couple married for many years also has that mental connection.
They are tuned to each other such that words are not needed for
communication.
 
In troubled times, such friends can be mobilized quickly.
 
Imagine your house is on fire. You may panic and not be able to
think straight. But a true friend will come as soon as you call him
and will quickly mobilize the action required, such as calling the fire
engine or calling up other friends.
 
Such brilliant friends are a moral support.
 
The above six qualities of a mitra help us to find good and true
friends. You should also make sure to develop these qualities and

become a good friend yourself.
 
Discover the good friend inside you.
 

PART C
 
LEADERSHIP IN ACTION
 
Working Together with Allies and Friends
 
I would rather walk with a friend in the dark, than alone in the
light.
 
HELEN KELLER
 
WHEN SIVANANDHAN WAS a senior police officer, naturally, the
power of his position got him a lot of connections. However, the trick
was not to just use the influence but make friends forever.
 
Some friends come into your life due to professional reasons; others
due to some need of theirs and we also approach and network with
others for some self-interests. Whatever be the starting point, one
should not cut off a friendship after the objective is fulfilled. This is
where we build relationships beyond reasons.
 
So long as the friendship exists for a reason, it will not have depth.
But, Sivanandhan has maintained his contacts and networks even
after his retirement.
 
When Radhakrishnan Pillai met Sivanandhan, he had only six months
to retire. I have known him more after his days as a top cop in
uniform. What amazed me was that he commanded the same
respect post-retirement.
 

While interviewing him for this book, I came to know that the
network he created was an important contributor to his successful
career. Let us look at some important aspects of how he effectively
used his mitras for success.
 
Your network will give you a lot of information about what is
happening. As a leader in the police force, it was important to not
just gather information, but also make sure that the flow of
information was regular and actions were taken accordingly.
 
When a person is in a position of authority, information comes to
him unasked. For example, if you are the head of a department in a
university, you will automatically get information about your field on
your table every day. You will get invitations for seminars, best
research journals, occasions to attend meetings with other experts in
the field and so on.
 
However, a good leader goes one step ahead in his network. He
does not just wait for information to come to him. He proactively
seeks out information.
 
Sivanandhan was a leader of the police force. His subordinates knew
the ground reality and were masters in their respective fields. So, he
had a system of daily meetings, where he discussed issues of
concern with his subordinates, listened to others and took decisions
to be implemented.
 
The daily meetings, analysis and decisions were part of his daily
routine throughout his career. Meeting with key members of the
team face to face helps in resolving confusions.
 
Even in the corporate world, we find the same system being used
effectively. Daily meetings have ensured good leadership. Sales have
increased, teamwork has become strong and financial control is also
guaranteed. In the hotel industry, the general manager of the hotel
has a daily morning meeting. He checks the room occupancy status,

the maintenance problems, the attendance of his staff and any other
matters of concern.
 
During these daily meetings, the leader also gets an opportunity to
share his side of the story with his team. This clear two-way
communication bridges the gap of miscommunication, which can
lead to disaster.
 
In policing, your network in the form of informers or khabaris is a
great asset. These informers provide inside information of the
various gangs that operate in the city or state. These informers are
the key to many landmark breakthroughs.
 
Information can come to a police leader either from an immediate
subordinate, a constable, an informer, or a common man who just
walks into your office unasked. The next step is to listen to these
with an open mind and analyze the information. Dig deeper and
check what is useful to you and make use of the same.
 
The larger your network of informers, the stronger you are. Have
multiple sources of gathering information. Information could also be
through newspapers, television or a journalist who knows different
aspects of the case.
 
In this context, Sivanandhan has an interesting insight, “A leader
should be like a swan who knows how to differentiate between milk
and water, and take the best out of it.”
 
While one can gather multiple pieces of information from various
sources, which one will be true and correct? That itself is a
challenge. Therefore, the skill required for separating milk and water
is required. In our Indian scriptures, this skill is called Viveka-Buddhi
— the faculty of our intellect to discriminate between right and
wrong, good and bad, relevant and irrelevant, needed and useless.
 
In the Arthashastra, this skill of thinking is called Aanvikshiki, a
method of strategic thinking and analysis.

 
There is a simple method by which you can analyze contradictory
information and find out which is correct:
 
“Have three information sources, take the average of what each of
them say and decide.”
 
So, if you are not sure of a situation, check with three people
separately. You will find the reality when one takes the average of
the information collected. As Sivanandhan says, “The truth always
lies somewhere in between.”
 
Apart from sources of information, one should also keep the
company of good advisors. These advisors are more mature and
senior to you. They have experience, wisdom and insight.
Sivanandhan made sure that he kept learning from his senior cops.
From one senior, he learnt the importance of discipline and
punctuality; from another, he learnt that dressing well makes one
feel positive; from a third, he learnt how to take quick action.
 
These advisors also come handy when one requires direction and
inputs for creating a strategy. After the 26/11 Mumbai terror attack,
Sivanandhan arranged seminars to gather wisdom from the best
brains of India. This also comes from good networking skills.
 
Your colleagues and friends in the police community also give you
inputs. For example, when Sivanandhan was the Director General of
Maharashtra Police, he had friends in other states, who were at
similar positions. Some of them were his batchmates; others he had
met as part of his work.
 
One can make use of these contacts. It is like sharing information
with each other. So, if a gangster has fled from one state to another,
the mitra in another state will come handy. One phone call will help
to activate the police force in another state and nab the gangster.
 

In national-level police meetings, one interacts with various other
state police officers. One comes to know what is happening
elsewhere. During these gatherings, one gets an opportunity to
develop new friends. If one is smart, one can maintain these
contacts for a lifetime.
 
Sivanandhan was highly networked among various levels of
policemen across the state, nation and the world. These formal and
informal networks and communities that he created has always been
one of his core strengths.
 
There are different types of mitras one needs to have: those who
are part of your group and community, and those who are not part
of your group. Sivanandhan had many friends who were not from
the police community.
 
There is a saying, “Birds of a feather flock together.” This is natural.
But it takes effort to fly with birds that are not of the same feather.
Having a lot of friends in the police community would be natural for
Sivanandhan, but having good friends in other circles was critical to
his success.
 
His friends included teachers, professors, academicians, doctors,
lawyers, 
engineers, 
chartered 
accountants, 
management
consultants, journalists and media experts.
 
We will see with a few examples how these friends also helped him
from time to time.
 
With his friends in the media and journalism, he launched the first
Mumbai Police magazine, The Mumbai Protector. This was in
association with the New Media group. The magazine, which is
available by subscription, is a good way of communicating the
initiatives taken by the police to the common man.
 
The Protector is the only magazine that informs you and also
connects you with the cops. It is a world-class magazine that

features interviews of top cops and influential people in the society.
It has been in circulation for nearly two years and is widely read by
the police and the common man.
 
The New Media group also brings out various books and publications
related to police functions, such as the compilation of speeches of
the seminars held to combat terrorism.
 
Sivanandhan’s friends in the medical field also helped him take
various health initiatives for the police force, such as a complete
health check-up of policemen, and printing of booklets that gave
health tips and their circulation to each police personnel.
 
The setting up of the Thane Police Hospital run under the
management of Wockhardt group is another example. Here too, the
policemen are given financially beneficial health schemes to enable
them to obtain world-class medical treatment.
 
Today, the new terminology in the government is “public
management”. Sivanandhan had many friends who were experts in
the management field. He organized lectures, seminars and
workshops of management consultants like (late) Rooshi Kumar
Pandya to improve the management skills of the police force.
 
His networking skills in various business associations also helped him
raise funds for many projects. Instead of the government bearing all
the costs, friends from the corporate world helped him finance
projects such as getting bulletproof jackets, or creating gymnasiums,
schools and canteens.
 
Also, to communicate the message of the police to the common
man, he gave hundreds of lectures through organizations like Rotary
Clubs, Lions Clubs, Indian merchant chambers, etc.
 
While working with friends, it is important to look at a win-win
situation for both parties. As the police force benefited, so these
groups also benefited from their association with the police force.

The image of a leader in the police began to change. Approaching
the policeman became easy; the walls that divided the people from a
policeman began to fall.
 
A good leader is one who appreciates leaders from other fields. He
respects them, learns from them and finally collaborates with them
for mutual benefit.
 
No society can progress without helping each other. For that, leaders
of every field should come together and help each other grow.
 
The relations that you build should last for a lifetime. It should be
permanent.
 
Sivanandhan’s networking skills have helped him post-retirement
too. From a police leader, he is now a corporate executive. He is the
chairman of Securus First, a company that provides security services
for large corporations in India and abroad.
 
The skills that were used to eliminate crime, corruption and
economic offences are now being effectively used to guide various
organizations towards better security.
 
Post-retirement, he was called by the government of India, by the
National Security Advisor (NSA) under the Prime Minister’s office
(PMO) to be a member of the special task force for study and
recommendations on internal and external security. This special task
force was headed by ex-Cabinet Secretary, Shri Naresh Chandra.
These projects do not come easily. They come due to your vast
experience and goodwill that you have generated over years.
 
He is also the security advisor to the Reserve Bank of India (RBI),
planning strategies against new-age crimes like cyber crimes and
electronic theft. He continues to be an advisor to various corporate
homes and teaches management and leadership lessons in some of
the premier institutions in India and abroad.
 

There are many bureaucrats who get a cultural shock after they
retire from the powerful post they held. For years, they were
followed by thousands of men who would be willing to sacrifice their
lives at one command. The power that a senior policeman held could
send fear waves among people.
 
Yet, the day one retires, everything is taken away. There is no more
command or authority; no further orders can be given. But what
stays is the goodwill that you have created, the friends you made
along the way. They are real assets that stay with you forever.
Furthermore, in the course of working on this book, we got
acquainted with each others Mitras. Our assets of friends have only
grown with time. This is our real asset.
 
In conclusion, let us see how Chanakya’s description of a good mitra
comes alive in Sivanandhan’s case.
 
   Alliance from the days of father/grandfather
 
Sivanandhan has kept in touch with batchmates of his IPS course
and other government departments even after his retirement. Over a
period of 35 plus years, these relationships span over generations.
Thus, these have become time-tested relationships – allied from the
days of father/grandfather.
 
   Greatness
 
Sivanandhan kept in touch with great people from different fields. If
someone is better than you in his field, make sure you respect such
people, be it doctors, management consultants, lawyers, or
professionals in other government departments. He always
associated with great people.
 
   Constancy

 
The power and seniority of his position gave Sivanandhan the
opportunity to meet a lot of new people. However, he used his
position to make friends who would be with him forever.
 
   Self-control
 
In the police force, it is important to exercise self-control. You will
get mouthwatering offers like getting a criminal to do some work for
a large sum of money. These may come as a friendship deal, but it is
important not to get carried away. Sivanandhan’s integrity ensured
that he was always in control. He has been on the right side of the
law and has lived up to his reputation of an honest officer.
 
   No separate self-interest
 
When Sivanandhan met corporate groups or medical professionals
who eventually helped him realize his goals for the police force, he
did not look at such possibilities from the perspective of, “What is in
it for me?” Instead, his outlook was always to create a win-win
situation for the police force and his friends. Thus, not having a
separate self-interest helps you create tremendous goodwill.
 
   Ability to mobilize quickly
 
Whether it was fundraising, executing projects or getting approvals,
Sivanandhan achieved these with great speed. This was because of
his mobilization skills that come through good networks.
 
   TIPS FOR WORKING WITH ALLIES AND FRIENDS   
 
1.   Network: It is important to have a good network of friends.

2.   Organize meetings: Gather regular information from your
team.
3.   Use your intelligence: It is important to distinguish between
right and wrong.
4.   Cultivate informers: They are your key to creating strategy.
5.   Help your friends: You need to help your allies when they
are in need.
The Leader in Me
 
 
 
 
 
 

About the Authors
 
Dr Radhakrishnan Pillai is from the University of Mumbai. He is a
trainer, researcher, author and teacher on leadership. His first book,
Corporate Chanakya, created records in the management books
category. Apart from being a popular bestseller, the book has also
been considered for academic research in educational institutions
across the globe. Having trained and mentored thousands of leaders,
Dr Pillai is well-known for making Chanakya popular as a
management and leadership guru.
 
D Sivanandhan has practiced leadership in the police force for over
35 years in life-threatening situations. He began his professional life
as an assistant professor of Economics at Madras University, but
joined the Indian Police Service (IPS) in 1976. His key postings
include a six-year stint at the Intelligence Bureau (1987–93), first as
DCP, and then as Deputy Director. During 1995–98, he led the police
in anti-Naxal operations as Deputy SP - Deputy IGP, Nagpur Range.
His most significant achievement is often considered to be during his
posting as Joint CP (Crime), Mumbai (July 1998–March 2001), when
under his strategic leadership, the police succeeded in breaking the
hegemony of the underworld over the city. Apart from his leadership
skills, Sivanandhan is also known for his keen interest and
contribution to the welfare of the police force. He was actively
involved in building schools for police children in Naxal strongholds
such as Gadchiroli and Chandrapur. Subsequently, as CP - Thane City
(February 2005–May 2008), he created the Thane Police School, a
world-class institution to impart education to the children of
policemen as well as other citizens. He has also been involved in
various health initiatives for the police, such as building hospitals
and gymnasiums, organizing health check-ups and yoga classes and
so on. After the Mumbai terror attack on November 26, 2008,