Preface
Let me tell you a story...
There was once a young man in Mumbai who wanted nothing more than to
succeed in the world of business. He had studied management in colleges that
extolled the virtues of the western ways of understanding this subject. Soon
enough, he worked his way up the corporate ladder, but finally decided to set out
on his own. After all, who wants to be bossed over by someone else?
His first venture was in the realm of spiritual tourism. Since no one in his
family had ever been an entrepreneur, he had to learn everything about setting up
a business on his own. By the grace of God, and the support of his business
partner, the business began to do well. From being a manager in someone else's
company, he had become the leader of his own business.
His next step? Creating a well-known corporate entity. He met people and
discussed his ideas and plans with them, learning from people, making copious
notes, reading books, attending seminars, and training programmes. And yet,
nothing helped. Something vital was missing in his pursuit for knowledge. He
was not able to figure out what this missing piece was, for a long time.
The answer was right within him.
Since his childhood, he had found guidance in a spiritual organisation and had
been blessed by many spiritual masters. During a spiritual discourse a Mahatma
said, "India, our motherland, has great history and legacy. Our Rishis were no
ordinary men — they have studied and perfected every science in this world.
Only if we were to look back into our glorious past we would find solutions to
all our modern problems."
This was the divine message he had been waiting for.
Management has been recognised as a science since the 1950s. One of the
fathers of modern management is Peter Drucker. But didn't 'management' exist
in India even before the 1950s and the Drucker era? As a nation we have over
5000 years to our credit. Did we not have management scientists in our country
before the 20th century?
In the ancient Indian scriptures — Ramayana, Mahabharata, the various
Upanishads — he found brilliant discussions of management strategies. Why

was it that us Indians, always look at what is wrong with India and never
appreciate what is great about our country? As a nation we have survived the
test of time. Even though we are still a growing economy, we are not a failed
nation. In the past, our country had achieved the peak of success for thousands of
years. How many nations can boast of such a heritage?
He now realised that the missing piece which would help his business grow
was to look 'within' rather than outside. The western principles of management
are undoubtedly good, but even his own ancestors were extremely good at
management.
Thus, one day, while looking for Indian books on management, he stumbled
upon Kautilya's Arthashastra, written by the king-maker, Chanakya. Who has
not heard about this book? Even he had. But hardly anyone from his generation
had studied it. He bought a copy.
A few pages into the book, he was upset! He could not understand anything!
He read the pages over and over again, but the message of the book was out of
reach. The subject itself seemed dry and boring. He felt the author had made
everything seem more complicated than necessary.
He said to one of his mentors, "I do not understand anything in the
Arthashastra, even though I am trying my best to learn from it." His mentor told
him, "In India, we consider the scriptures to be mirrors. They reflect who you
are. So if you do not understand Arthashastra, do not blame the mirror. As you
grow and experience life, you will understand the book better."
That year, he went on a pilgrimage to Kailash Mansarovar, the holy abode of
Lord Shiva. One evening, a voice seemed to speak to him, 'Make Kautilya's
Arthashastra your life-long pursuit. Don't just study it, but apply it in your life.
Live the Arthashastra!' He could not believe that he was listening to his own
thoughts, this had to be divine intervention!
He had heard about an ashram in Kerala, dedicated to the research of ancient
Indian scriptures. He declared to the Acharya (teacher) in charge of the ashram,
"I want to study the Arthashastra." The Acharya was happy to see the young
man's interest, but said, "You will have to come here and learn it under the Guru-
Shishya Parampara." This meant taking a break from the business and staying in
the ashram and studying under a Sanskrit scholar.
This was not an easy decision for a businessman from Mumbai. But, with the
help of his partner, he took time off from the business, and studied the wisdom

of the Rishis. The time he spent in the ashram changed his life forever.
He realised that each modern management theory had already been explored
thousands of years ago in the Arthashastra.
With a deeper knowledge of management he now returned to his urban life to
apply what he had learned. Immediately, he experienced success! His business
grew and people were impressed with his new skills. When they asked him how
he had achieved success, he said, "Two things helped me — the grace of my
Guru and the knowledge of Kautilya's Arthashastra."
Friends, this is my story. Every word is true. But, the story does not end here.
In fact, this is where the story begins....
After I returned from Kerala I applied Kautilya's practical and perfect theories
to my own business (Atma Darshan, www.atmadarshan.com). Even though
Atma Darshan brought me success, something else began to happen. My friends
from the corporate world urged me to share this knowledge I had gained.
I was invited to speak at various seminars, conferences, and training
programmes in India and all over the world. Businessmen consulted me on
several matters. Well-known publishing houses and newspapers asked me to
write about how Kautilya's wisdom could be applied to modern businesses. I was
also asked to host a radio show.
I met so many people who are interested in Indian management and Indian
wisdom. Despite the differences between them with regard to age, nationalities,
designations, and industries, all those who participated in my workshops and
chose to attend my seminars felt a deep respect for Chanakya's genius.
And then came the support of the SPM Group of companies which allowed
me to delve deeper into Arthashastra. I am now fully devoted to the cause of the
promotion and application of Indian management ideas. Today, I am the
Director of the SPM Foundation which aims to 'Make India strong and self
sufficient' in the ancient Guru-Sishya Parampara method.
This book is a documentation of all my ideas that I have shared with millions
of people from the corporate world, all across the globe, about how to apply
Chanakya's practical solutions to solve day-to-day problems in modern
businesses.
Corporate Chanakya is not just about me. It's about you and everyone else
who wants to practise the principles of Indian Management in their work and

wants to be successful.

Chanakya — Who Was He?
Born in 4th Century B.C. in India, Chanakya was also known as Vishnugupta
and Kautilya. Through the centuries, scholars have described Chanakya as a rare
mastermind who became an expert in varied and specialised fields like
management, economics, politics, law, leadership, governance, warfare, military
tactics, accounting systems, and several others. The 6000 sutras have been
classified into 15 books, 150 chapters, and 180 topics by Chanakya himself.
He was responsible for bringing down the Nanda dynasty and establishing his
able student Chandragupta Maurya on the throne as the Emperor. Hence, he is
called a 'Kingmaker'. He is also credited with masterminding the defeat of
Alexander in India who was on his march to conquer the world.
As a political thinker, he was the first to visualise the concept of a 'nation' for
the first time in human history. During his time, India was split into various
kingdoms. He brought them all together under one central governance, thus
creating a nation called 'Aryavartha', which later became India. He documented
his lifelong work in his book Kautilya's Arthashastra and Chanakya Niti.
For ages, rulers across the world have referred to the Arthashastra for building
a nation on sound economics, based on spiritual values.
Arthashastra when literally translated means 'scripture of wealth' but it
contains knowledge about every subject under the sun. It's the knowledge of
wealth and a wealth of knowledge.

Acknowledgements
When I started on my journey to learn and teach Chanakya's ideas I was not sure
about how it would work. It was just an idea, a dream. I took my first step and
then thousands of well-wishers joined me and encouraged me along. The number
of people who are responsible for making this book a reality is endless. I must
acknowledge some of these wonderful people who gave me strength right from
the start.
CHINMAYA MISSION I am a 'product' of the spiritual organisation Chinmaya
Mission 
(www.chinmayamission.com). 
met 
my 
Gurudev 
Swami
Chinmayananda (1916-1993) when I was a child. He is my spiritual and
management guru. Gurudev said, "A single ideal can transform a listless soul
into a towering leader among men." This statement has been the guiding
principle of my life.
Today, Swami Tejomayananda, the global head of Chinmaya Mission,
continues to give me the same support. He chose the beautiful name of my first
company — Atma Darshan (vision of the self).
Among hundreds of Acharyas (teachers) of the mission, some with whom I
am closely associated require mention — Swami Sacchidananda, Swami
Sadananda, Swami Ishwarananda, Swami Swaroopananda, Swami Mitrananda,
have encouraged me to spread the work of Chanakya.
Swami Advayanandaji — the Acharya in-charge of Chinmaya International
Foundation (CIF) accepted me as a student of CIF where I learnt the complete
6000 sutras of Arthashastra and this has been the turning point in my life.
DR. GANGADHARAN NAIR, former Dean of Adi-Shankara Sanskrit
University, Kalady, Kerala, my teacher and my guru of Arthashastra. His wife,
Dr. Uma Devi Nair, herself a Sanskrit scholar, was like a mother to me while I
was studying the Arthashastra.
VENKAT IYER, my friend since childhood and later my partner in the
company Atma Darshan. Without his support, I couldn't have spent time learning
about Chanakya's work. He also runs a successful venture called Wealth Tree
Partners (www.wealthtree.in).

MUULRAJ CHHEDA AND SPM GROUP, came as a godsend. Muulraj, is
the Director of Swati Energy and Projects Private Ltd, part of the SPM group of
companies. SPM stands for Strength, Progress with Maturity, and is also the
initials of the three Founder brothers — Shantilal, Pravin, and Mavji Chheda.
They supported my research and promotion of Chanakya's works.
Today, I am the Director of SPM Foundation (www.spmfoundation.in) the
education wing of SPM Group (www.spmgroup.co.in) the vision of which is to
bring back ancient Indian knowledge and apply it to our modern day problems.
The other directors of the SPM Group — Rajen Chheda, Kinnjal Chheda, Niket
Shah, Guruvinder — and their spouses have supported me in my search of
knowledge. Each day, when we sit for lunch together, I call it my 'classroom'
where words of wisdom from senior members have always given me insights
into the intricacies of human nature.
MTHR GLOBAL, is More Than HR Global (www.mthrglobal.com). The
core team — Rajesh Kamath, Vipul Agarwal, Ashish Gakrey, Rajesh Gupta, and
Preeti Malhotra — were the first to christen me 'Corporate Chanakya'. I dedicate
the title of this book to them.
MUMBAI UNIVERSITY'S Dr. Shubhada Joshi, Head of Department of
Philosophy, and her team, give my work on Chanakya the academic outlook it
required. SPM Foundation partnered with the Mumbai University for offering
joint programmes on 'Chanakya's Management Ideas and Indian Philosophy'.
WORLDSPACE SATELLITE RADIO'S Karthik Vaidyanathan, Harish
Puppala, Seetal Iyer came up with a wonderful idea for a show called 'Ask
Chanakya' on Moksha, a channel on Worldspace. I hosted at least a hundred
shows.
Also, I am grateful to my other 'media friends' — Dinesh Narayan, Meenal
Bhaghel, and William Charles D'Souza for their support.
Gautam Sachdev promoter of (www.indiayogi.com) introduced my first online
e-course based on Arthashastra. My course now has students from over 25
different countries. I am glad that I can use technology to take Chanakya's
message to the world.
Several MANAGEMENT GURUS supported my thirst for knowledge. I
would like to thank Dr. Subhash Sharma, Dr. M.B. Athreya, Debra and William
Miller, Sudhir Seth, and Dr. Anil Naik.
I am grateful to the POLICE FORCE — Sandeep Karnik, (IPS) Dhanraj

Vanzari, Milind Bharambe (IPS), Satish Menon (Railway Protection Force) —
who made me realise that behind the tough looking cop there is a human being
who feels just like you and me.
MY FAMLY, especially my parents, C.K.K. Pillai and Sushila Pillai, have
my heartfelt gratitude. Coming home late at night, not being sure of a regular
income while I developed a business, missing weekends and family time while
prioritising professional commitments, my life would never have been smooth
without my wife Surekha. Her parents Shekhar and Dhanvati, and her sisters
Sarikha and Chandrika bring joy to my life.
My FIRST STUDENTS OF ARTHASHASTRA — Mala Thevar, Yogesh
Sanghani, Anuraag Gupta, and his sister Seema Gupta, and Anupam Acharya.
Their dedication to knowledge has given me the confidence that this good work
will continue for many long years after I am gone.
And I must thank Ranjit Shetty, my friend from the Chinmaya Mission, who
has decided to dedicate all his time to implementing the ideas of Chanakya.

Notes •  Chanakya, Kautilya, and
Vishnugupta are the names of the same
person. Either of the names has been used
in this book to refer to Chanakya.
•  This book does not compare Indian management ideas against western
management ideas. In fact it is complementary to western management thoughts.
We have taken the best of both worlds.
•  In most cases, leaders have been referred to as 'he'. But it also applies to
'she' as well. Since Chanakya has taken the King (male gender) as the leader, the
pronoun 'he' is used. Leadership and management skills are not gender-based but
they are qualities which can be developed as a 'mind-set'.
•  In this book, I have referred to verses or sutras from Kautilya's
Arthashastra. For those who would like to read the verse in the original text, the
verse number is written in brackets. The first digit is the book number. The
second is the chapter number and the third digit is the verse number. For
example, "He (leader) should constantly hold an inspection of their works, men
being inconstant in their minds." (2.9.3) So, this verse is from Kautilya's
Arthashastra Book 2, Chapter 9 and Verse 3. The same format has been
followed in all chapters.
• The book that readers can refer to for the verses quoted, is the English
translation of Kautilya's Arthashastra by R.P. Kangle of Mumbai University,
published by Motilal Banarasidas. The explanations given are the interpretation
of the author. Various other translations and commentaries of Arthashastra other
than this book are available.
TIP
This book has 175 chapters. The idea is not to read it as a novel but to enjoy
its practical benefits. Read a chapter, or a few chapters, a day, apply the
teachings in your life, and observe the benefits. It only takes three minutes to
read each chapter.

PART I
Leadership

Applying Arthashastra in Business 
Whenever I offer training sessions on Arthashastra, the first question I hear
people ask is, 'Chanakya and Arthashastra existed in the past, but what does
Arthashastra have for me?', 'What are the benefits I will get by studying this?'
Well, as Chanakya himself said about the benefits: "This science (of
Arthashastra) brings into being and preserves spiritual good, material well-being
and pleasures, and destroys spiritual evil, material loss, and hatred." (15.1.72) •
 Protecting And Expanding If one has achieved something, it has to be protected.
If you earn a few lakh rupees, it has to be saved and protected. You should not
let anyone steal it. At the same time, we should think of how to expand these
lakhs into crores. This is where 'investment planning' comes in.
Similarly, studying the science of Arthashastra helps one accomplish as well
as preserve spiritual good, i.e. the goodwill and ethics that one has cultivated,
along with material benefits (financial and lifestyle).
In addition to achieving, Arthashastra even gives us strategies on how to
expand and improve on these.
•  Destroy The Wrong Only protecting and expanding the good is not enough.
One has to destroy the evils also. This is a two-way street. Arthashastra destroys
spiritual evils like laziness and lethargy.
It also helps in destroying material and monetary losses with the help of good
planning and implementation. Best of all, Arthashastra helps in destroying even
hatred. You see, hatred is a negative emotion that is self-destructive.
As the saying goes, "A man who is angry destroys himself first." Even in a
war, one should respect the enemy and not fight because of hatred alone.
• Expansion Of Knowledge By studying the Arthashastra, one increases
knowledge and experience. How, you ask? Chanakya's treatise may be
theoretical, but studying it automatically translates into practical application in
daily business life — the best way to gain wisdom.
But its most important lesson is that one learns by teaching, i.e. sharing
wisdom with others. So do not forget to do this as it will help and support your

peers just as it did for you.

To Avoid
What a Leader should Not Do — 1
Arthashastra is not only a compilation of Chanakya's wisdom, but also contains
practical insights into even more ancient lessons of management, politics, and
strategy.
Arthashastra contains a wealth of wisdom on leadership, its development, and
application. There is some valuable information about the challenges of
leadership, something that today's corporate world is struggling to understand.
Chanakya not only tells us what a leader should do, but also what he should 'not'
do.
In Book 7, Chapter 5, from verse 19 to 26, Chanakya outlines 21 things that a
leader should avoid doing. We will be studying these words of caution in the
next ten chapters. These can be applied not only to business leaders, but also to
heads of departments, project leaders, community leaders, politicians, and can
even be applied by the head of a family, or any other institution, or organisation.
Chanakya had said, "Reasons for dissatisfaction of subjects: discarding the
good and favouring the wicked." (7.5.19-26) Who are the subjects?
Well, they are the people who are reporting to you, or are dependent on you.
They wait for your directions, which in itself has a direct effect on their lives. In
the case of a company, it's the employees. In a department, they are your team
members. In a family, they are your children and relatives. The first and
foremost duty of a king (leader) is to keep his subjects happy.
Now, the first reason for subjects to become unhappy is when the king
discards the good and favours the wicked. Subjects come to the leader for
justice. When they do not find a solution to their problems among themselves,
they seek the leader's advice, direction, and justice. If he favours the wrong and
discards the right, this is a very serious problem.

Here are some tips on how to understand who is right: •  Listen To Both
Together And Separetely It's very necessary to listen to both sides of a story. But
after the two parties have expressed their views together, do not hurry with your
decision. When both parties are facing each other, there are a lot of emotions and
personal feelings expressed. Therefore, listen to them separately too. Get the
facts. You will get a better idea of who was right. At times we are not able to
come to any decision, this is called 'Dharmasankath'. In such conflicting
situations take the help of books (scriptures) and masters learned in the particular
field.
•  Announce The Verdict Unemotionally After you have analysed the situation,
announce your verdict. Also explain the 'reason' behind the conclusion you have
reached. Be just. But more than anything else, be unemotional. That's the most
vital part.
The whole idea is not to hate the bad. As Gandhiji put it, "Remove the
wickedness, not the wicked." Even while punishing the wrong, one should give
them an opportunity to learn and improve.

What a Leader should Not Do — 2
Among the many things that a leader should avoid doing, Chanakya says,
"Reasons for dissatisfaction of subjects: By starting unrighteous injuries not
current before, by indulgence in impiety and suppression of piety, by doing acts
that ought not to be done." (7.5.19-26)
These three actions could alienate a leader from his subjects. First, if a leader
starts harming others in a way that was not used before. Second, by indulging in
wicked deeds and suppressing good deeds. Third, by performing actions that
should be avoided.
How does the leader know if his behaviour and actions are right? Here are
some tips:
• Do Not Start New Punishments
In every company or organisation, there are methods of punishing the
wrongdoer. For example, warnings and memos are issued. At times, employees
are even suspended. But note that these are within the laws of the company.
Never ever try to do any serious injury that goes beyond the law. For example,
never slap or hit an employee in front of others, even for a serious lapse, or bad
behaviour. After all, this is not only a physical injury, but also an emotional
injury. Punishments within the right limit are always respected and honoured.
•  Be A Person Of Character
We find that many leaders are hypocrites. They show a very different face in
front of their employees, while their private life is generally not very ideal. As it
is said, "The character of a man is what he is in the dark." So a leader, even in
his non-public life, should remain a man of great integrity. Be truthful to
yourself.
•  Differentiate Between 'Right' And 'Wrong'
This is the greatest quality that a leader can develop. While running an
organisation or company, there are times when the leader comes across

conflicting situations. Sensitive issues like money, people management, etc
become his regular concerns. If he cannot differentiate between what to agree
and what to disagree with, he will always be stuck. To master this art, learn from
those who are far more experienced, or others whom we call 'men of wisdom'.
Always, remember that the well-known serenity prayer of Reinhold Niebuhr
also applies to a leader when he walks into an office:
"God grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change; courage to
change the things I can; and wisdom to know the difference!"

What a Leader should Not Do — 3
A leader should be very alert and vigilant about his own actions. Chanakya
points out, "Reasons for dissatisfaction of subjects: By ruining rightful acts, by
not giving what ought to be given and securing what ought not to be given to
him (the leader)." (7.5.19-26) There are leaders who try to suppress the good
deeds performed by others. For example, if there are any projects or ideas that
have been worked upon by the subordinates, they should not be destroyed.
Rather they should be preserved and considered as an asset to the organisation.
Next, what rightfully belongs to the subjects should be given to them — be it
their salaries, incentives, or promotions. Even a pat on the back is a great reward
for juniors.
Finally, the leader should not try to get for himself that which he does not
deserve. He should only take his due share.
Here are some tips: •  Encourage New Ideas Your employees are not just
machines to be operated. They are human beings with a head on their shoulders.
Each mind can create a different idea, and new ideas are the fuel of any
organisation. As a leader, it is very important to keep note of these new ideas
and experiment with them.
While doing this, involve the employee who came up with that particular idea.
Also give credit to him/her.
•  Honour And Respect Them A psychologist once said, "Like food, shelter and
clothing, appreciation, is a basic human need too." So learn to appreciate every
person. A good word from the boss goes a long way in boosting employee
morale.
And this should not be artificial. Show that you genuinely respect them. In
many companies, there are 'employee of the month' awards and in some
organisations, a photo of the most efficient employee is displayed at the
reception .
• Never Misuse Your Power Remember the famous dialogue from the movie

Spiderman — Peter Parker receives sage advice from his uncle, "With great
power comes great responsibilities!" A leader can misuse the power, if he is not
a person of integrity. Especially if he is not answerable to anyone. However, he
should make himself accountable to himself. Additionally, see to it that others
get equal opportunities to become good leaders themselves. A good leader is the
one who creates more leaders.
In the Navy, when the ship crosses the equator, a ceremony called 'Crossing
the Line' is held. During this, a junior cadet is made the captain of the ship and
all the senior officers have to follow his orders. Try this for a day in your
organisation. While this may sound like fun, you will also learn a lot about what
your juniors think about you.

What a Leader should Not Do — 4
Leadership is a very dynamic responsibility. It's not something to be learnt from
books or lectures alone. Rather, it's about various factors that one needs to tackle
in any given situation.
Continuing this series on Chanakya's tips for effective leadership, we find that
he repeatedly emphasises the importance of leading by example. The next two
points tell us what makes a bad leader:
"Reasons for dissatisfaction of subjects: By not punishing those deserving to
be punished; by punishing those not deserving to be punished." (7.5.19-26)
In the movie Troy, an officer tells the General, "Sir, the army is under fear that
you may punish them." The General adds something very important, "Fear can
be constructive if you can manage it well."
Men are managed by the fear of punishment. It is because of the fear of the
police, that the crime rate is controlled. It is because of the fear of losing the job
that employees become productive. It is only because of the fear of punishment
that children are controlled by teachers and parents.
However, managing someone's fear is an art.
Here are some tips on managing fear:
•  Be Fearless Yourself
It is easier said than done. Being fearless at all times is the highest human
achievement. Only years of doing the right things can make one totally fearless.
A warrior once said, "If I look directly into the eyes of the enemy for a few
moments, my fear disappears." In other words, face the challenges of life
directly without depending on anything or anyone.
•  Never Misuse Fear
Leaders can misuse the fear of their subordinates. One naturally commands
respect just because of being in a position of power. Still, respect cannot be
demanded. One can force others to respect them through authority and the power

wielded. But to earn respect, you have to win the head and the heart of the other
person. If you want to check if you are a successful leader or not, try to
understand if every one is comfortable and happy when you are around.
•  Punish Fairly
At times, punishment is unavoidable. However, one can punish rightly and
justly. If you punish too much, you will be seen as a terror. But if you are too
soft, the work will not get done. It's a balancing act. So think twice before you
pass your judgment — be firm, yet considerate.
A criminal was being sent to the gallows. He was asked what his last wish
was. He replied to the shock of the jailor, "To kill my father because of whom I
am going to the gallows..." he continued, "He never corrected me when I was
wrong, nor did he punish me when I deserved it."

What a Leader should Not Do — 5
Controlling crime is an extremely vital function in any society. By not arresting
criminals, the police not only gives support to existing criminals, but also
encourages new criminals. On the other hand, if the police arrests someone who
should not be arrested, a new criminal is created.
A leader should be aware of this truth, since such a situation can easily arise in
any corporate.
Hence, Chanakya says,
"Reasons for dissatisfaction of subjects: By seizing those who ought not to be
seized; by not arresting those who ought to be seized." (7.5.19-26)
The classic book by Victor Hugo, Les Miserables, brings this out in a very
dramatic manner. A man gets arrested for stealing a loaf of bread under
unavoidable circumstances and is put into prison for over twenty years, and from
a noble man a criminal is born.
While taking any decision, the leader should carefully consider this aspect.
But how will he wipe out crime and still be just? Here are some tips:
• Understand What Causes Crime
There are two reasons why a person becomes a criminal — one is need, and
the other is greed. When a truly needy person cannot fulfill his basic needs, he
takes the easy route of crime. Food, clothing, shelter, and financial security are
basic needs. If these are not provided, there is a high risk that the person will
take to theft and robbery. A leader should have the complete knowledge of his
subordinate's basic requirements. He should even go that extra mile to make sure
that even the employee's families are taken care of.
•  Control Greed
The second reason for a person to take to a life of crime is greed. In spite of
their high standard of living, many people from rich families turn to crime. In
such cases, the leader has to enforce the fear of punishment. If not punished,

they can take the law for granted. "Arrest them," says Chanakya. Once given a
loose hand, it is difficult to control them later. When one such powerful person is
punished, automatically the others come under control.
•  Make And Apply A System
The only way to keep crime under control is to make systems that are
beneficial to the law and order of any state or organisation. However, just
making systems is not helpful — they need to be applied properly. The law
should not stay in the books alone. Rather, it should be used to maintain social
order.
Always remember that you cannot support a criminal even if he is someone
known to you.
As a thinker once said, "If you share your friend's crime, you make it your
own."

What a Leader should Not Do — 6
A leader is a protector. He can be compared to a shield that saves the subjects
from external enemies. But, what would happen if the protector himself became
the destroyer ?
Consider Chanakya's words seriously, or expect your subjects to feel insecure.
He says,
"Reasons for dissatisfaction of subjects: By doing harmful things and
destroying beneficial things, by failing to protect from thieves and by robbing
(them) himself." (7.5.19-26)
First and foremost, a leader should not do anything that will harm people or
the organisation. Also, beneficial things should not be destroyed. For example,
destroying respected religious symbols can lead to problems.
Secondly, a leader should protect the subjects from robbers or any other
external factors that can erode the wealth of the people, the state, or the
employees of an organisation. Most importantly, he should not rob them
himself!
But how can a leader ensure such protection? Here are some tips:
•   Be The Wall
The leader has to be like a wall — a protection as well as a barrier. When an
outsider tries to attack your subordinates, step in front of them and face the
challenge yourself. An employee may not know how to take care of himself. In
such situations, the mighty leader is his/her only hope. So be there when they
need you.
•   Take Action Against Outsiders
"Any one who disturbs the happiness and the peace of my subjects will not be
spared!" said a king. Similarly, as is indicated in the verse, Chanakya says that
the king should protect the subjects from thieves. If a thief is caught, punish him
immediately. If he is left free, the fear of the thief returning lingers in the minds

of all. Strict actions will ensure the people's confidence in the leader.
•  Don't Rob Your Own People
Robbing does not just mean stealing money and other physical objects.
Honour, dignity, and gratitude can be stolen as well. If a person truly deserves it,
then give him rewards and awards. Your people are your greatest assets. Pay
them well, pay them on time. Remember, only if your own army is strong will it
fight for you.
A leader also has to be a good fighter. And when he has to fight for his people
he needs to do his very best. As Faye Wattleton said so beautifully, "Whoever is
providing leadership needs to be as fresh and thoughtful and as reflective as
possible to make the very best fight."

What a Leader should Not Do — 7
High attrition rates are a major problem in the IT, ITeS, BPO, and other sectors.
The reasons why people leave a job could be anything — the lack of incentives,
or better offers from rival companies who are luring away the employees to deal
with their own shortage of manpower.
But regardless of such external conditions that the current employers can
hardly do anything about, the fact remains that employees are motivated or
demotivated by the way their employers treat them.
There are three ways of getting work done from your subordinates —
instigation, motivation, and inspiration. Instigation is the way terrorists are made
to work. Motivation involves incentives and promotions, whereas inspiration
comes from within the self, which is eternal and everlasting.
The real challenge for an employer is to take his employees from 'Motivation
to Inspiration'.
Chanakya outlines the reasons that demoralise employees,
"Reasons for dissatisfaction of subjects: By ruining human exertions, by
spoiling the excellence of work done." (7.5.19-26 )
Employees work hard and exert themselves. If their efforts are not recognised
and are destroyed instead, the first seed of attrition is sown. Secondly, when the
employees create or produce something better for the company, he or she
deserves rewards. So, how does one inspire one's employees?
•   Money Is The Priority
Do employees work for money? Yes, they do. That is the first and the most
important requirement. No organisation can keep a person inspired, if the
salaries are not paid on time. Also offer options beyond their salaries —
employee stock options, incentives, shares in profits, and other schemes can be
worked out by the management to keep the employees financially secure.
•   Work Hard, Rest Well

The employer has to believe that optimum productivity is achieved by giving
space and peace of mind to the employee. In some developed countries,
employees work very hard for ten months to take a two-month vacation. We may
have a problem with this model, but the important fact is that the thought of a
two-month vacation has made the employee work hard for ten months. The
balance between work and rest has to be maintained for better results.
•   A 'Higher Purpose'
Employees want something beyond money and that is respect and challenge.
They also want a purpose for their lives. If the leader is able to find that 'purpose'
for the employees then phenomenal success is guaranteed. This is a spiritual
requirement. The Spiritual Quotient (SQ) of the employee has to be developed
for this to happen.
A recruitment advertisement of a well known IT company carried a caption
under an employee's photograph: 'I found a purpose to live for in this
organisation'. A 'Best Employer' survey has also found 'higher purpose' to be
essential for employees.

What a Leader should Not Do — 8
During one of my training programmes, while discussing the leadership qualities
described by Chanakya, a participant observed, "It would have sounded more
positive if the session was called 'What a leader should do'."
I explained that the title of the session which emphasised what leaders should
not do was by design, rather than by fault. The human mind works in a certain
pattern and studies reveal that we become more alert when we hear negative
words.
Words such as 'danger', 'death' and 'destruction' have the power to move a
person from lethargy to activity. So continuing this ten-part series, we now look
at a few more things a leader should not do...
"Reasons for dissatisfaction of subjects: By doing harm to principal men and
dishonouring those worthy of honour, by opposing the elders, by partiality and
falsehood." (7.5.19-26) In the above verses, the emphasis is on three key ideas —
respect for elders, being impartial, and not engaging in falsehood.
• Respecting Elders And Principal Men A society which does not respect elders
and men of knowledge cannot survive for long. The Sanskrit word for elders is
'Vriddha'. The word 'elder' here has two meanings: one, a person who is elder by
age, and second, a person who is elder by wisdom. It is natural to respect any
person who is elder to us by age. We find that, across Asian cultures, respecting
elders has been considered a noble and high virtue. However, there are young
people with a lot of knowledge or wisdom who also command respect. Even
they are Vriddhas.
One of the reasons why young managers from top business schools land high
salaries and top positions is the knowledge they bring into the company. Such
young, but senior, people should always be respected and never dishonoured. Do
not oppose them. Listen to their views before taking any decision.
•  Not Being Partial In conflict management, the best thing to do is to do what is
'correct'. Do not favour those who are wrong even if they are the people closest

to you. On the other hand, always support those who are right, even if they are
not known to you. Partiality demoralises everyone in an organisation. So be
even-minded, and take an objective view before making any move.
•  Not Indulging In Falsehood Satyameva Jayate, says the Indian national
emblem. But almost everyone thinks this cannot be practised in today's world.
This is not true. The reality is that we do not have patience to wait. All the top
companies that practise good governance look for long-term benefits. Focusing
on research and development, people, strategy over tactics, etc are key aspects of
success for such organisations. Therefore, you should also not support falsehood.

What a Leader should Not Do — 9
A management student once asked me, "Do businessmen think only of money all
the time?" I replied, "The answer to this is very subjective, however there are
many other things that the businessman needs to think through, even for making
money. Being financially successful — which is a basic requirement — is
determined by other parameters like goodwill, service levels, and also
commitment from your very own people. "
Now, we will look at some more factors highlighted by Chanakya that a leader
should be alert about:
"Reasons for dissatisfaction of subjects: By not requiting what is done, by not
carrying out what is settled." (7.5.19-26)
In other words, a businessman also has to think about his subordinates who
become unhappy when they are not paid for what they have done and, secondly,
when their leader becomes complacent.
•  Not Paying For What Is Done
The economic cycle of a business is dependent on cash flow from one person
to other. The client pays for the service to the provider; they in turn pay their
employees and suppliers. The suppliers will have to pay their suppliers. Even if
one link in the chain breaks, there will be disharmony. Therefore, a leader needs
to pay his dues to everyone on time. After completing a job, always pay the
people involved.
•  Not Being Complacent
An entrepreneur started a business and struggled a lot. Finally, his business
became financially successful. He then went to his mentor and asked, "Sir, now
my business is doing well. What should I do?" The mentor advised, "Go start
another business."
This is where the real fun begins. The spirit of being industrious needs to be
carried forward. After having learnt all about how to start and run a business,

one should never become complacent.
In fact, use your know-how to start other businesses and projects. Till this
point, you required a mentor. Now you can become a mentor to other struggling
businessmen.
•  Continuing What You Have Started
Starting another business does not mean that you must stop your first venture.
From being a person who worked on the specific details of the first business, you
can now move on to a supervisory level. You still need to drive the sales of the
first business, but adopt a holistic approach. Your time will be spent between the
first and the new business you have started. Manage both with equal
commitment.
I was acting as a consultant for one of India's biggest conglomerates. As we
were discussing strategies, the director told me, "For us, it is not about just
running a business. We are in the business of running businesses!"
That is how great businessmen think!

What a Leader should Not Do — 10
An employee's happiness or unhappiness is purely in the hands of the leader.
With this, we come to the last two notes of caution for leaders.
Chanakya continues,
"By the negligence and indolence of the king and because of the destruction of
well-being (through these causes) decline, greed and disaffection are produced
in the subjects." (7.5.19-26)
A leader should never be careless. Even a small issue should not go unnoticed.
Secondly, the employee's prosperity and well-being should never be disturbed. If
a leader ignores this advice, the downfall of the organisation begins.
The primary reason why leaders tend to be negligent and indolent is lethargy.
Without vision, greed takes over. The organisation begins to break apart.
Throughout this series of ten chapters (Chps 61-70), the one clear message is
— 'Be Alert'. Keep watch over others and also over yourself. Some tips on being
alert :
•  Be In Touch With The Last Man
The challenge for any government is to check if the last man in the last village
is happy. Till that is achieved, a leader's work is not complete. At times, we find
that what is reported is only the success of a few people. As a leader, never go
by these reports. Be on the 'ground' yourself. Regularly track what even the peon
or driver feels. Talk with them, understand what keeps them going, or makes
them feel frustrated. Take corrective steps.
•  Take Time Out Without A Reason
In the corporate world most of the work done is based on agendas, results and
targets. It's important to open up your mind. It gives a fresh outlook to the
organisation. There should be at least a small part of your day when you do
nothing! The space that this creates in your mind will give a new insight into the
work one does. With that insight apply new techniques.

•  Keep Watch
Keep an eye over the people. Keep watch on what is happening in the
industry. Keep a watch on changes in the surroundings and your society. All
things in the world are interconnected. A small change in some other place will
affect you soon, in some way or the other. Therefore, keep yourself updated and
informed in all matters.
In this 10-part series we dealt with 21 points that a leader should avoid doing.
A student once said to me, "Sir, this is very difficult to follow as I can't
remember so many points."
Well, one does not have to remember them all. If you practise even one of
these rules, the remaining will follow. They are interconnected. Just start. That is
the only way to be sure if these techniques work.
Good luck on the journey to discover the leader in you...

PART II
Management

Want to be a Good Boss?
Surveys have repeatedly proved that one of the biggest reasons why people leave
an organisation is because they cannot work under their boss. To be an ideal
leader, or a good boss, is an eternal challenge.
A good boss is not produced in B-schools, nor with the help of management
lectures and seminars.
But Chanakya gives us a hint:
"And, in all cases, he should favour the stricken (subjects) like a father."
(4.3.43)
In our own homes, the role of a father has been well-defined. He is full of love
and concern. At the same time, he is also a strict disciplinarian. But whatever the
case, a father will never abandon his children.
Here are some tips for you to adopt with your subordinates to become a good
boss:
•  Understand Them
Always remember that an employee is not just a money-generating machine.
They have a life outside the office. They have a family, a friend circle, and also
various interests and hobbies. It is important to understand their total personality.
Once you understand their expectations, it will be easy to manage those
expectations. Only then will you be able to tune into your employees.
•  Give Time To Educate Them
No good parent will ever expect the child to work and make money for them
from Day One. Similarly, your employees have to be educated, instructed, and
prepared before they meet bigger challenges. Even you have to be part of their
training and development. No doubt they will make mistakes and just like
children fall when they try to walk, so will employees stumble in the course of
their duty. But with support and self confidence, they will one day run faster
than you.

• Discipline With Love
The greatest challenge for any parent is to know the balance between
discipline and love. The solution is love with discipline and discipline with love.
An area has to be demarcated — a framework has to indicated — beyond which
there is dangerous territory. Subordinates, like children, are full of energy and
enthusiasm. It is important to encourage their creativity. But it is equally
important to give direction to their work. Discipline, coupled with love, is the
answer.
Finally, whatever you do, remember that no classroom lectures can achieve
what one learns from direct experience. Therefore, in your own maturity,
understand that in spite of your best efforts, the employee may still make the
same mistakes that you did. Accept it with love and grace.
There is a beautiful phrase I am reminded of, "A man learns that his father was
right, when his son tells him that he is wrong!" Maybe we will need to remember
this while dealing with our employees.

Finance
Net Profit Counts!
I once met a successful French businessman who had started his business from
scratch. It was while he was sharing his success stories with me that I got an
insight into how beginners in the business field misunderstand 'profits'.
He said, "First-level businessmen always feel income is profit. Once they
mature in running a business, they realise that real profit is what comes after
calculating the expenses and taxes."
Now, this French businessman was merely echoing words that were first
written by Chanakya two thousand years ago,
"When assigned work, he should show income cleared of expenses." (5.5.1 )
This is a simple, yet most important basic, lesson for the head of a business
unit or profit centre. Such people, when they report to their head or board of
directors, always show numbers, which is the top line (incoming). Now it's nice
to have a good turnover, but sales are not profits.
But how do we understand this difference? Let us take it step-by-step:
•  Top-line
The sales numbers (what is sold and orders that have been confirmed) is
generally called the 'Top-Line'. These numbers are what people look at. "We
reached a 100 crore figure this year." This statement would generally mean that
the sales that particular year have touched a figure of 100 crore. Sales are the
revenue for any organisation. It is also called 'ITB' (In The Box), the sales
pipeline that have been converted into confirmed orders.
•  Expenses
Sales bring money into an organisation. This incoming is the cash flow of the

organisation. A regular and strong cash flow is the backbone of any business.
After this, expenses take place. Salaries to the staff, investment in infrastructure
like office, technology, and information systems are calculated. Next, we have
other overheads like travel, marketing cost, training etc. All this put together are
the total expenses of the company. As the company grows its top-line, its
expenses also grow accordingly.
•  Bottom Line
What is left from sales minus the expenses are your profits — the Bottom line.
This is what differentiates successful businesses from sick businesses. There are
companies that have great top lines but small bottom lines. Yes, now there are
other factors as well — like taxes, total assets and their valuation etc. However,
what the shareholders will generally look at is the dividend which is now called
the real bottom line.
Adi Godrej, Chairman of the Godrej group of companies had summarised it
briefly, "Sales is Vanity, Profit is Sanity, Cash is Reality!" Understand this basic
principle and you will understand how to make your company more profitable.

Want to Succeed?
Kautilya's Arthashastra comprises fifteen books. Of these, the sixth book has
only two chapters. Yet, it's very important as it explains how a king can run his
kingdom successfully. It also lists the three ways to succeed and how we can do
it.
Chanakya had said:
"Success is threefold — that attainable by the power of counsel is success by
counsel, that attainable by the power of might is success by might, that
attainable by the power of energy is success by energy." (6.2.30)
While it takes a lifetime full of valuable experience to understand the meaning
of these words, we can at least understand its essence:
•   Succeed By Counsel
There are many people who try and keep trying, and still don't succeed.
Frustrated, they believe it's not in their destiny to succeed. But they might have
just not got the right advice from the right person.
I remember a foreigner who was trying to set up a business here and could not
get started for nearly two years. He finally approached a legal advisor who gave
him just a few tips, and he was off!
This accurately portrays the first kind of success which, according to
Chanakya, is achieved by listening to, and learning from, the right experts .
•   Succeed By Might
When we fight our battles alone, the chances of winning are less. "Together
we grow," a spiritual master had once rightly said. Therefore, the second method
is to succeed by might — i.e., by the power of association.
I have a friend who is into politics. He always rues the fact that he had to
spend a lot of time trying to understand just how politics worked.
"I wish I had a Godfather who would guide me," he once confessed. That's as

close to the truth as you will get in today's highly competitive world. In life, if
we get to associate with a powerful person, success is virtually guaranteed.
•   Succeed By Energy
There are quite a few people who, even if they cannot achieve success via the
first two methods, still succeed driven purely by their energy and dynamism.
Their enthusiasm is very contagious too. They have a 'never give up' spirit. For
them, life is not about how many times one fails. Rather, it's about the feeling —
"Success is just a step away!"
They learn from their mistakes, from books, from every person they meet and
from every event in their life. Life is a journey for them, and never a destination.
Remember, success is an attitude a person develops. So never give up till you
achieve your goal. Chanakya had said, "Even after a hundred trials, an
enthusiastic man will surely succeed."

PART III
Training

Degrees alone are not Enough...
A friend of mine who heads the HR department at a leading retail company once
said, "I am frustrated with the quality of students that come to us! "
For me — as a person who believes in the potential of management students
— this came as a surprise. But on further questioning, I found myself supporting
this statement!
Most students from B-Schools also have MBA degrees. But few of them have
any practical idea of the corporate world.
Chanakya had said,
"One conversant with the science, but not experienced in practical affairs,
would come to grief in carrying out undertakings." (1.8.25)
With over a thousand management institutes across India, the 'quantity' of
management graduates is increasing. But management gurus and thinkers are not
convinced of the 'quality'. The theory of the science of management is good, but
all that we learn has to be effectively applied as well.
This situation can be tackled by targeting the different levels of education and
vocation. Here are some tips for the same:
•  For Management Students
Management students, or those studying in B-Schools, should not look for
degrees and jobs only. They should be life-long learners. Even while studying
their course, they should go the extra mile to increase their practical knowledge.
They should meet industry people, look for latest studies and reports on the
Internet and maintain a record of their learning. It is important to maintain the
reading habit, even after they get the degree and a job.
•  Management Schools
The Directors and the Professors of management institutes should be up-to-
date with the latest problems in various industries. They should spend enough
time understanding the industry's specific needs. This should be passed on to the

students and practical solutions should be worked out. Industry experts should
also be on the board of management institutes .
•  Industry
The challenges of every industry are increasing and changing day by day.
Industries like telecom, retail, finance, tourism, and others — through their
respective associations —should make a list of the key result areas (KRA) that
they would expect from their new managers. It is important to communicate this
to the management institutes so that the students are trained accordingly.
•  Individual Companies
When the new recruits fresh out of a B-School join an organisation, the
management should acquaint them with the realities of the corporate world.
They should mentor them by deputing a senior. This is not to say that the
industries should be blind to the recruit's theories. Rather, after accepting and
absorbing these, the industries should provide the student with insights into
practical aspects.
Remember, the road between theory and practice can only be shortened by a
deeper understanding and open communication. Each individual has to take the
initiative to learn the know-how of the world by keen observation, open-
mindedness, and a will to take up higher responsibilities.

Mixing up the Old and New
India, particularly the Indian corporate world, is going through a very dynamic
change. Organisations and companies that have been in existence for decades are
suddenly seeing a new way of doing business.
Technology, connectivity, globalisation — all have had a strong impact on the
way business is being done. But, the most important change has been that a
young work force joins the team to make decisions and scale up the businesses.
The old with their experience and the young with their dynamism and new ideas
can create a wonderful organisation.
Chanakya says,
"As between a newly arrived (army) and one that has come after a long
march, the newly arrived would fight after learning about the region from others
and being mixed with old troops." (8.5.4)
The older people in any organisation are basically soldiers experienced in
fighting many battles. They know the region (market and customers) well and,
therefore Chanakya suggests that the newly arrived army (the young generation
managers) can do better if they learn from the experience of the previous ones.
This can be done easily:
•  Be Open-Minded About Change
Just because it worked your way, does not mean there's no other way. Elders
should be open to change. Look at how weapons have changed in wars today.
The soldiers are different. Therefore, a different game plan also has to be
adopted accordingly. In fact, the best thing to do is to learn from the young
generation who are well-versed with the modern weapons — computers,
internet, mobiles (technology that the young generation is good at).
•  Be Ready To Learn
For the young generation, it's imperative that they learn from the mistakes and
experience of the elders. What we are today is because of the hard work of the

previous generations. We may have great ideas, but experience is very valuable.
Just being with the elders and listening to the stories and their problems will
change our approach to handling things.
•  Mix And Match
A good mix and match of the two generations sets up a good organisation.
Some of the best performing organisations have already done it. The top IT and
consulting firms who provide solutions and ideas are better equipped to handle
various multiple projects because of the mix of the elderly and experienced,
along with the techno-savvy young generation.
Once a business leader noticed that the school children were quite well-
acquainted with the computers in their school. Those were the days when PCs
had just made an appearance and were proving difficult to understand for his
generation. He had a brainwave. He brought in the kids as computer teachers for
his senior managers. Hence, the first computer gurus for his company where not
corporate trainers, but school children.

Are you really an Active Person?
So many people imagine themselves to be hard-working, sincere and 'active' —
without understanding whether this is a fact, or a figment of their imagination.
You do not become active if you are just running around and working.
Chanakya had a very simple definition of 'activity' in the Arthashastra:
"Activity is that which brings about the accomplishment of works undertaken."
(6.2.2)
So, you should describe yourself as an active person only if you have
completed all the projects you started. This is quite important, and let me tell you
how.
Ask yourself if you have always achieved the 'results' that you started out for.
So many of us — whether students, home-makers, office-goers, or managers —
have this common complaint: "I work so hard, but nobody bothers to appreciate
or understand me."
Let me tell you that if you finish your work and finish it well, you will be
noticed. If you don't finish your assigned projects satisfactorily, it becomes a
mere action, and not something 'active'.
Now, how can we plan an activity and achieve the desired results?
•  Define Your Goal Or Purpose
Before you start, ask yourself questions like — Why am I doing this work?,
What am I supposed to achieve by doing this? If you are not sure about the
answers, take the help of seniors who can guide you better.
Achieving 'clarity' regarding the goal is important before we start any work.
Do a goal-setting exercise before you start. It should be time-bound and specific.
•  How Will I Do It?
Plan your work well with all the required details. Remember, if you fail to
plan, you plan to fail! Also, understand the basic fact of life that you cannot do

everything on your own.
So, if required, have a team around you, along with good advisors and
consultants. Once the road-map is set, it becomes easy to reach our destination.
•  Focus On Results, And Achieve It
As you begin your journey, remember to look at your road-map from time to
time, or you will lose direction. Make sure you are proceeding towards the same
place you started out for.
If you are a truly 'active' person, you will plan well, execute effectively, and
achieve everything smartly. Several people can, and will, misdirect you.
However, it's you who has to be careful and stick to your goal.

Remembering those who got you the Job!
Of all the places, it's in the office where most people will concede that their
success has come about due to the contribution and guidance of various people.
Now it's our duty to never forget even the smallest assistance we have been
given. Even the world's first management guru, Chanakya, says the same,
"He should gratify, according to his power to help, one who has helped him."
(7.16.19)
But let's face it — the human mind is very unstable and in the long run we
generally forget people and the things they have done for us. And in today's fast-
changing world where there's hardly any free time, it is even more difficult to
remember such things.
Practise these suggestions,
•  Write It Down
Make a list of the people who have helped you and have been instrumental in
shaping your life and career. Your first boss, the placement agency, the friend
whom you always call up for any professional help you need — all of them.
Treat this list as one of the most important documents of your life. Keep adding
names to it, as more people help you.
•  Make An Effort To Call People
When making the list, don't forget to add their contact details. The special
dates in their lives would be a good addition too. These will give you a good
reason call them and wish them on special occasions. If not on each occasion,
just one call a year on their birthdays would be enough .
•  Give Them A Gift
Chanakya, in his book Arthashastra, says that a gift is the most powerful
medium that can influence anyone. Do not even waste time thinking about this!
However, do not go out of the way to buy an expensive gift. As mentioned in the
verse above — "according to his power", buy the gift according to your capacity.

•  Be Ready to Help
Most of the above may even look superficial. But helping out, especially when
needed, is the most valuable thing one could do for another person. The HR head
of company put it beautifully, when he said, "Always help others get jobs — you
never know when you will require one."

Do we take up the New Job?
Now that's a quandary all of us have faced at some time or the other. To continue
in the current job, or move to a different company, to be in service, or start our
own business, to keep working, or take a break for higher education — these
questions haunt every person in the corporate world today.
Chanakya offers a solution for managing such conflicts,
"In case of two alternate routes, he should march in a region suitable to
himself." (10.2.10)
This advice is self-explanatory. But the choice taken subsequently could either
make or break us. And this does not apply to just choosing jobs.
Such a 'conflict management situation' can arise in any and every aspect of life
itself. At such times, you have to think with your head and feel through your
heart. Keep a check on your strength and weaknesses.
How does one do this? Well, here are some tips for you to follow when facing
that tough decision:
•  Ask Yourself
The first person you have to consider is yourself. Ask yourself if you are
doing the right thing. If you feel that in the current company and industry your
growth has stagnated, then, prepare for a change. It would actually be great to
have an open discussion with your boss, or seniors, to get a new direction. If you
still feel the solution is not forthcoming, then seek help externally.
•  Speak To Others
You can consult experts in your field and check if you are capable of doing
something better. If this is too difficult, look at the websites that can guide you
in this matter. Join an online group of like-minded people and seek guidance and
tips for better understanding of your situation.
•  Follow That 'Gut-Feeling'

Finally, after all this analyses, what is important is to take a step in the
direction where you want to be in the future. If you continue doing what you are
doing, you will continue getting what you are getting. So if you want to be
different from what you currently are, do something different. Once you take this
first step, half the battle is won — provided you want to fight for something
better!
Look, there are plenty of opportunities today. But only a few take risks. Only,
those who take calculated risks with the right measures can succeed in achieving
their long-term goals.
And please never regret a decision. Even, and especially, if it is a wrong
move, keep going along the chosen path. You just need to follow the military
maxim — 'Burn the bridges behind you.' That'll leave no avenue for retreat!

'Two' many Bosses?
This has happened, or will happen, to most of us. The problem with having two
bosses is especially acute in those organisations where roles and organisational
structures are not clearly defined, giving rise to a conflicting situation.
But what can we do when there are two seniors giving contradictory opinions
and instructions?
Chanakya had a solution for employees facing such a situation:
"They shall obey the orders of one who proposes what is beneficial to all."
(3.10.39)
So when faced with such a situation, the subordinate will have to sit down and
think coolly. He will have to judge the situation and the attitude of the two
bosses, and then decide on his own which order will be beneficial to all.
Now how does one practise and make a sound judgment in the above case?
Here are a few tips:
• Be a Good Learner
The first and foremost quality of a good subordinate is the ability to learn from
all possible people and then apply the same lessons. Be open-minded. Learn
from everyone. Every person has at least one good quality which can benefit
you. The more you can learn from your seniors, the better for you in your career.
Make daily notes of what you have learnt and keep a file. Record your learning
— it will help you in the long run and also give you that valuable experience
with which you can decide which boss is good .
•  Keep Cool
The best strategy for dealing with conflicting situations is to remain cool and
not rush to conclusions. Think logically and realistically. If necessary, take a
sheet of paper and write down the issue or problem that you are facing. With a
cool mind, think through and then reach your own conclusions. If you still find it
difficult, talk to a friend — you will find this very helpful, even for tackling

stress.
•  Learn To Say 'No'
A boss will never like a subordinate who says, 'No'. At the same time a boss
also does not like a subordinate who always says 'Yes'. Then there's the 'Yes
boss!' employee — he is a danger to the employer too. Initially, it may look like
such a person is trying to impress the boss. But he is probably providing the
wrong information. So, when dealing with your boss, learn to say 'No', but only
when required. Never be rash — convey your inability to do a task, in a soft and
peaceful manner.
Just remember that, in the end, it is all about how you manage your bosses. A
lady was once asked, "It must have been very difficult for you to report to two
bosses..." The reply was, "No way! I always get two gifts on my birthday!"

How much Money should one ask for?
All of us, at one time or the other, have faced the dilemma of not knowing what
remuneration to charge for our work. Whether it's the salary at a new job,
funding for a business, charging a client for services, or even asking for
donations for a noble cause, we always get stumped by the question — how
much should we ask for ?
Chanakya had a solution to this problem as well.
He said:
"He should ask money of the rich according to their wealth, or according to
benefits (conferred on them), or whatever they may offer of their own will."
(5.2.35)
So what Chanakya suggested was to first — even before you ask for any
money —study the person you have to approach. People who master this art can
easily succeed in any venture.
Let us split the above verse to understand it better:
•  According To Their Wealth
Now this is very subjective. The definition of 'wealthy' differs from one place
to another. For instance, the richest man in a village is just another man in a big
city while your rich neighbour would be just another man according to global
standards.
Therefore, Chanakya suggested that one should ask money from the rich as
per their wealth.
•  According To Benefits Conferred
A request along these lines is generally responded to positively. That's because
you ask for remuneration in line with the favour you did to someone, or for the
benefit gained by your association, or for just a recommendation or advice you
had given. You can ask for payment in kind, or cash.

The perfect illustration of this would be what one of my clients once did when
his doctor performed an operation for free. My client calculated the amount he
would have spent on the surgery and then bought the good doctor a gift of the
same value, as a small token of his appreciation and which the doctor could not
refuse.
•  As Per Will
Now there are certain situations where you cannot make a valuation. If you
ask for more, you may get refused .
If you ask for less, the opportunity is gone. In such a case, let the person
decide as per his will. You may actually end up getting more than you expected.
I once heard of a hotel which practises the policy of — 'Eat as much as you
can, pay as much as you will'.
Surprisingly, customers are so happy with the service that the hotel owner
makes more money than what he would have had he stuck to the prices on the
menu card!

Knowing where to go for Shelter 
Everyone goes through tough times, especially businessmen. They venture into
unknown territories, face financial problems, natural calamities, death, or the
exit of a very important partner — all of which can strike at any moment.
A student of management once asked a very important question on this matter.
And, in Kautilya's Arthashastra, this exchange gives us a reply: "He to whom he
may be dear, or he who may be dear to him — which one among these two
should he approach for shelter? "(Chanakya's reply) He should go to him he may
be dear. This is the best course of seeking shelter." (7.2.25) We generally
consider that, during difficult times, it's our near and dear ones who will help us.
And here, as we are going to ask them for help (shelter), Chanakya makes us
think! "Are you dear to that person, or is the person dear to you? Only approach
the person who considers you as dear to him, otherwise you will be
disappointed."
What's the difference? Let us see in detail: • When You Are Dear To A Person
This is a great achievement. Swami Chinmayananda says, "To love and be loved
is the greatest achievement of life." You may have touched the heart of someone
in a special way, due to which they develop a special respect for you. If you are
a teacher, you will understand this. If someone considers you dear to him, then
there is no question of him refusing shelter to you during troubled times. His
house may be small, and his pocket may not be deep, but he will go that extra
mile to accommodate and help you. This person will always be ready to help
you, whatever be the reason for your problem.
•  When A Person Is Dear To You This is generally a kind of one-way traffic.
You consider a person to be dear to you. But does he also feel the same way?
You are assuming something which may not be reality. Thus, you may consider
a person very close to you, and you may even go to him for help. But you could
come back disappointed as he never considered you dear to him. It's possible you
had extended some help to him, but he may not consider that as something great.
To know this difference is very important. Only then can you seek shelter from
that person.
•  It's Not Easy To Be Dear To Everyone Yes, it's not easy to win everyone's

hearts. How do you know whom you have become dear to? There is only one
solution — during your good times, help everyone. Great people never close the
door on any seeker. Probably during this process, without being aware, you
might touch someone's heart. And it is nature's law that, during troubled times,
this 'forgotten' person will give you shelter.

Lost your Job?
Many people lost their jobs because of the recession in 2008-09. Even those who
are still employed are spending sleepless nights in fear of being sacked, or
finding out that their employer is a fraud! Everyone has one common question
— are there better job opportunities out there?
My reply is a confident yes, thanks to constant enquiries from various firms,
asking for people who can be recruited. In fact, I have even been asked to be part
of the interview panel for several companies.
So, I am sure there are jobs even in these troubled times, possibly better ones!
Whenever I am involved in any recruitment process, I advise the top
management with what Chanakya had suggested so many centuries ago:
"He (leader) should make new men well-versed in the knowledge of his
ministers." (1.8.22)
So the first quality that recruiters should look for in a candidate when looking
for employability is knowledge and a ready-to-learn attitude.
But what should the candidate do?
•  Be Ready For Change
Some say that the recession is here to stay. Even though I do not agree fully, I
know its impact has been very dangerous, at least for the time being, as many
firms shrink their workforce.
So, if you are among those whose companies are seriously thinking of
effecting job cuts — be ready to change. It's high time we rolled up our sleeves
and moved onto a different path.
Come out of your comfort zone. Be ready to experiment.
•  Try Smaller Companies
It's surprising that many SMEs (small-and medium-scale enterprises) are still
going strong. They may not be big brands, but they have sound financials. These

are companies that have a good work culture. Try to get yourself placed in these
organisations, where they will welcome you. Look out for ads in newspapers and
job sites.
•  Think Long-Term
Youngsters just don't do this! In times of recession, they (and indeed all of us)
need to learn one important lesson — life is not all about the good times, but
also the tough times.
So always think about the long-term in your career. Look out for companies
that will give you not only the temporarily fat salaries, but will also help to give
your talents an expression.
Finally, remember that a career is not just about the money, but about finding
your true 'inner' calling and being happy.
Let the recession help you discover yourself. All the best.

To be or not to be?
At the top level it is all about making decisions. A delay in timely decisions
leads to loss of not only time and money, but also mental energy.
Managers have to be very careful while making decisions. The first step is to
collect the right information from the right sources. The Chief Executive spends
a lot of time collecting and analysing various information. Such information is
categorised by Kautilya as three types:
"The affairs of a king (leader) are (of three kinds, viz.,) directly perceived,
unperceived and inferred." (1.9.4)
•  Directly Perceived
This is the most authentic form of information one can gather. Seeing is
believing. A study of sick factories revealed that, various labour problems
happened when the production manger spent more time in his cabin than on the
shop floor. In Japan, a manager who spends most time meeting people in the
workshop is highly respected.
Directly meeting people in 'their' work area gives one the best insights into the
real issues the employees may face. It exposes one to ground level realities and
also gives an opportunity to meet every one on a personal front. As they say, the
best leaders are the ones who know their employees by their first names.
•  Unperceived
What is communicated by others is unperceived. As human beings we have
limitations. We cannot be at all places at the same time. In areas we are not able
to reach directly, we may gather information from other sources. Technology
can also help us gather more such information
However, this may not be a very authentic source. A lot of contradictory
information may also be floating around. Therefore, one has to be very careful
while studying the source of information.
• Inferred

Forming an idea about something that has not been done with the help of
something that has been done is called 'inferred'. For example, if a manager who
has been highly productive comes up with a suggestion to improve productivity,
one can 'infer' from his high productivity that his suggestion could be valuable.
Keen observations and lots of experience go into making good decisions. A
mature leader can analyse any given situation within moments. He acquires the
'knack' of quick decision making.
What about those leaders who are still learning the tricks of the trade? How
does one know if the decisions taken are correct? Once a successful businessman
was asked this question, he replied, "By taking wrong decisions."
The most important factor in decision making is 'clarity' about what one wants
to achieve. As Ben Stein, a famous American lawyer, law professor, economist,
actor and White House speechwriter once said, "The indispensable first step to
getting the things you want out of life is this — decide what you want!"
Everything else follows.

Migration: To accept Job Seekers?
Migration is a natural process. Animals and birds migrate in search of food and
shelter. All of us are aware that even human beings migrate. Some migrate for
money, some for education, while some for a better lifestyle and comfort. But
from the angle of governance, or even that of an employer, it is important to
check the credentials of each migrant or candidate.
Migration does not automatically convert people into assets in the new place.
Chanakya says,
"And he should not allow in the city 'outsiders' who cause harm to the country.
He should cast them out in the countryside or make them pay all the taxes."
(2.4.32)
This shows how particular Chanakya was in keeping a watch over each person
coming into his kingdom. If you read the above verse carefully, you will realise
that several centuries after Chanakya's time, this became a formal visa process.
The sutra can even help you choose whom to accept when potential candidates
migrate to your organisation:
•  Check Your Requirement
Firstly, be clear what your company, organisation, or country's requirement is.
Based on that, allow migrants to come in. Many migrants add value to a new
place. The labour class of India migrated to the Middle East and became a cheap
but efficient labour force. Indian doctors and engineers who migrated in the
1960s added great value to countries like USA and UK. A nation like Singapore,
which values human capital, has created intellectual assets from migrants.
So can your organisation, provided you know what you want and make that
synergy work.
•  Check Their Requirement
Understand the need of the person seeking migration or a change in job. It
could be economic, security, and even safety. War-torn countries displace entire

generations to neighbouring nations .
In the corporate world too, companies that suddenly close down, end up
generating a huge pool of talent looking for work. Even otherwise, growing
companies and multinationals talk of global talent than just national talent.
But, even if that candidate migrating to your firm has this talent, you should
be clear about what that person's needs are and whether this can be fulfilled.
• Win-Win, Or 'No Deal'
All those seeking migration need not be productive. Just be aware that both —
the one migrating to you as well as your firm which may accept him — should
benefit from the change. Therefore, it is necessary to have a win-win deal. Or to
put it in the language of management guru Stephen Covey, "No deal!"
Also remember that you have to be open and tolerant since — be it in nations
or companies — people who migrate not only come with suitcases but also bring
along their culture, habits, and mind-sets. Therefore, be ready to adapt.

Applying the knowledge 
from Arthashastra 
The knowledge in Arthashastra needs to be used in practical life too. The most
frequently asked question is — how will these ideas help my business?
I quote Chanakya for an answer: "In this way (by following ideas given in the
Arthashastra), the kingdom continues in the succession of his sons and
grandsons, free from the dangers caused by men." (5.1.56) A study of Kautilya's
Arthashastra guarantees tools and techniques by which you can create a business
model which will exist beyond you. It will make your system good and
permanent, with people following you for generations. Look at how we still
follow Chanakya!
Another query that's often put to me is for 'step-by-step instructions' on how to
benefit from these ideas.
Well, this is the best way: • Stay In Touch These ideas are the simplified
version of the original Arthashastra. You can write to us for more information
about how to study the text and get more knowledge. Mail us at
info@spmfoundation.in and also visit our website www.spmfoundation.i n
•  Gift A Copy Of This Book As an author I do not want you to 'buy' this book. I
want you to gift a copy of this book to others. If you gift this to others, watch a
miracle happen. Someone will gift it to you. Let the knowledge spread to
maximum people across the globe.
•  Apply These Models The book may have come to an end. But after
understanding the theories now you need to start applying it. Chanakya's ideas
have worked for over 2400 years. It will work for you as well. Try it.
No theory is good till you benefit from its practical application. The same is
the case with Kautilya's Arthashastra. You have to be your own judge.
•  Teach It To Others The best way to learn anything is by teaching it to others.
So whatever you have learnt, teach it to others. If you are a boss, teach these
principles to your subordinates. If you are a teacher by profession teach it to
your subordinates. If you are a trainer use these techniques in your training